<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" data-darkreader-mode="dynamic" data-darkreader-scheme="dark"><head><style class="darkreader darkreader--fallback" media="screen"></style><style class="darkreader darkreader--text" media="screen"></style><style class="darkreader darkreader--invert" media="screen">.jfk-bubble.gtx-bubble, .captcheck_answer_label > input + img, span#closed_text > img[src^="https://www.gstatic.com/images/branding/googlelogo"], span[data-href^="https://www.hcaptcha.com/"] > #icon, img.Wirisformula {
    filter: invert(100%) hue-rotate(180deg) contrast(90%) !important;
}</style><style class="darkreader darkreader--inline" media="screen">[data-darkreader-inline-bgcolor] {
  background-color: var(--darkreader-inline-bgcolor) !important;
}
[data-darkreader-inline-bgimage] {
  background-image: var(--darkreader-inline-bgimage) !important;
}
[data-darkreader-inline-border] {
  border-color: var(--darkreader-inline-border) !important;
}
[data-darkreader-inline-border-bottom] {
  border-bottom-color: var(--darkreader-inline-border-bottom) !important;
}
[data-darkreader-inline-border-left] {
  border-left-color: var(--darkreader-inline-border-left) !important;
}
[data-darkreader-inline-border-right] {
  border-right-color: var(--darkreader-inline-border-right) !important;
}
[data-darkreader-inline-border-top] {
  border-top-color: var(--darkreader-inline-border-top) !important;
}
[data-darkreader-inline-boxshadow] {
  box-shadow: var(--darkreader-inline-boxshadow) !important;
}
[data-darkreader-inline-color] {
  color: var(--darkreader-inline-color) !important;
}
[data-darkreader-inline-fill] {
  fill: var(--darkreader-inline-fill) !important;
}
[data-darkreader-inline-stroke] {
  stroke: var(--darkreader-inline-stroke) !important;
}
[data-darkreader-inline-outline] {
  outline-color: var(--darkreader-inline-outline) !important;
}
[data-darkreader-inline-stopcolor] {
  stop-color: var(--darkreader-inline-stopcolor) !important;
}
[data-darkreader-inline-bg] {
  background: var(--darkreader-inline-bg) !important;
}
[data-darkreader-inline-invert] {
    filter: invert(100%) hue-rotate(180deg);
}</style><style class="darkreader darkreader--variables" media="screen">:root {
   --darkreader-neutral-background: #181a1b;
   --darkreader-neutral-text: #e8e6e3;
   --darkreader-selection-background: #004daa;
   --darkreader-selection-text: #e8e6e3;
}</style><style class="darkreader darkreader--root-vars" media="screen"></style><style class="darkreader darkreader--user-agent" media="screen">@layer {
html {
    background-color: #181a1b !important;
}
html {
    color-scheme: dark !important;
}
iframe {
    color-scheme: initial;
}
html, body {
    background-color: #181a1b;
}
html, body {
    border-color: #736b5e;
    color: #e8e6e3;
}
a {
    color: #3391ff;
}
table {
    border-color: #545b5e;
}
mark {
    color: #e8e6e3;
}
::placeholder {
    color: #b2aba1;
}
input:-webkit-autofill,
textarea:-webkit-autofill,
select:-webkit-autofill {
    background-color: #404400 !important;
    color: #e8e6e3 !important;
}
::-webkit-scrollbar {
    background-color: #202324;
    color: #aba499;
}
::-webkit-scrollbar-thumb {
    background-color: #454a4d;
}
::-webkit-scrollbar-thumb:hover {
    background-color: #575e62;
}
::-webkit-scrollbar-thumb:active {
    background-color: #484e51;
}
::-webkit-scrollbar-corner {
    background-color: #181a1b;
}
* {
    scrollbar-color: #454a4d #202324;
}
::selection {
    background-color: #004daa !important;
    color: #e8e6e3 !important;
}
::-moz-selection {
    background-color: #004daa !important;
    color: #e8e6e3 !important;
}
}</style>
    <meta http-equiv="Content-Type" content="text/html; charset=utf-8">
    <title>
      The Distributed Proofreaders Canada eBook of "The Verse Translation of 'The Eumenides [The Furies]' of Aeschylus", by Gilbert Murray.
    </title>
    <script async="" src="//www.google-analytics.com/analytics.js"></script><script src="/cdn-cgi/apps/head/CTZ9hkMV_1yEDqF02AiLntBidbM.js"></script><meta name="darkreader" content="4b10b83bd4c8420f91e1b9a669a95b72"><style class="darkreader darkreader--override" media="screen">.vimvixen-hint {
    background-color: #684b00 !important;
    border-color: #9e7e00 !important;
    color: #d7d4cf !important;
}
#vimvixen-console-frame {
    color-scheme: light !important;
}
::placeholder {
    opacity: 0.5 !important;
}
#edge-translate-panel-body,
.MuiTypography-body1,
.nfe-quote-text {
    color: var(--darkreader-neutral-text) !important;
}
gr-main-header {
    background-color: #1b4958 !important;
}
.tou-z65h9k,
.tou-mignzq,
.tou-1b6i2ox,
.tou-lnqlqk {
    background-color: var(--darkreader-neutral-background) !important;
}
.tou-75mvi {
    background-color: #0f3a47 !important;
}
.tou-ta9e87,
.tou-1w3fhi0,
.tou-1b8t2us,
.tou-py7lfi,
.tou-1lpmd9d,
.tou-1frrtv8,
.tou-17ezmgn {
    background-color: #1e2021 !important;
}
.tou-uknfeu {
    background-color: #432c09 !important;
}
.tou-6i3zyv {
    background-color: #245d70 !important;
}
div.mermaid-viewer-control-panel .btn {
    background-color: var(--darkreader-neutral-background);
    fill: var(--darkreader-neutral-text);
}
svg g rect.er {
    fill: var(--darkreader-neutral-background) !important;
}
svg g rect.er.entityBox {
    fill: var(--darkreader-neutral-background) !important;
}
svg g rect.er.attributeBoxOdd {
    fill: var(--darkreader-neutral-background) !important;
}
svg g rect.er.attributeBoxEven {
    fill: var(--darkreader-selection-background);
    fill-opacity: 0.8 !important;
}
svg rect.er.relationshipLabelBox {
    fill: var(--darkreader-neutral-background) !important;
}
svg g g.nodes rect,
svg g g.nodes polygon {
    fill: var(--darkreader-neutral-background) !important;
}
svg g rect.task {
    fill: var(--darkreader-selection-background) !important;
}
svg line.messageLine0,
svg line.messageLine1 {
    stroke: var(--darkreader-neutral-text) !important;
}
div.mermaid .actor {
    fill: var(--darkreader-neutral-background) !important;
}
mitid-authenticators-code-app > .code-app-container {
    background-color: white !important;
    padding-top: 1rem;
}
iframe#unpaywall[src$="unpaywall.html"] {
    color-scheme: light !important;
}
embed[type="application/pdf"] { filter: invert(100%) contrast(90%); }</style><style type="text/css">

body {font-family: Times, Serif; text-align: justify; margin-top: 100px; margin-bottom: 100px;
       font-size: 110%; margin-left: 15%; margin-right: 15%}

p {text-align: justify; margin-top: .75em; margin-bottom: .75em;
    font-size: 110%; margin-left: 10%; margin-right: 10%}

p.dramper {margin-top: .75em; font-style: normal; text-align: justify;
           font-size: 80%; text-indent: 0em; margin-bottom: .75em; margin-left: 30%; margin-right: 13%}
           /* used for dramatis personae */

p.center {margin-top: .75em; font-style: normal; text-align: center;
           font-size: 110%; text-indent: 0em; margin-bottom: .75em}

p.char {margin-top: 1.75em; font-style: normal; text-align: center;
         font-size: 110%; text-indent: 0em; margin-bottom: 1.2em}

p.direct1 {margin-top: .75em; font-style: normal; text-align: justify;
           font-size: 110%; text-indent:-2.5em; margin-bottom: .75em;
           margin-left: 21%; margin-right: 19%;}

p.direct3 {margin-top: .75em; font-style: normal; text-align: justify;
            font-size: 110%; text-indent:-2.55em; margin-bottom: .75em;
            margin-left: 33%; margin-right: 19%;}

p.direct4 {margin-top: .75em; font-style: normal; text-align: justify;
           font-size: 80%; text-indent:-2em; margin-bottom: .75em;
           margin-left: 21%; margin-right: 19%;}

p.direct5 {margin-top: .75em; font-style: normal; text-align: justify;
            font-size: 110%; text-indent:-2.55em; margin-bottom: .75em;
            margin-left: 44%; margin-right: 25%;}

p.smcen {margin-top: .75em; font-style: normal; text-align: center;
           font-size: 85%; text-indent: 0em; margin-bottom: .75em}

p.smcen2 {margin-top: .75em; font-style: normal; text-align: center;
           font-size: 75%; text-indent: 0em; margin-bottom: .75em}

/* Poems */

.poem {text-align: left; margin-left: 10%; margin-right: 10%}

.poem br {display: none}

.poem.stanza {font-size: 95%; margin: 1em 0em 1em 0em}

.poem span.i6 {text-indent:-3em; padding-left: 3em; display: block; margin-left: 6em}

h2 {text-align: center; margin-top: .25em; margin-bottom: .75em; clear: both;
     font-size: 150%; letter-spacing: .15em}
h3 {text-align: center; margin-top: .25em; margin-bottom: .75em; clear: both;
     font-size: 130%}

hr {text-align: center; margin-left: auto; margin-right: auto; width: 33%;}

hr.med {text-align: center; width: 20%; margin-top: 2em; margin-bottom: 2em;
         margin-left: 34%; margin-right: 34%; height: 1px;
         border-width: 1px 0 0px 0; border-style: solid; border-color: #000000;
         clear: both;}

hr.tb {text-align: center; width: 20%; margin-top: 2em; margin-bottom: 2em;
        margin-left: 25%; margin-right: 75%; height: 1px;
        border-width: 1px 0 0px 0; border-style: solid; border-color: #000000;
        clear: both;}

.smcap {font-variant: small-caps; font-size: 100%}

.right {text-align: right; padding-right: 2em}

.pagenum {position: absolute; text-align: right; color: #808080; font-size: 60%;
           left: 2%}

/* Footnotes */

.footnotes        {border: dashed 1px;}

.footnote         {margin-left: 10%; margin-right: 10%; font-size: 0.9em;}

.footnote .label  {position: absolute; right: 84%; text-align: right;}

.fnanchor {
    vertical-align: super;
    font-size: .8em;
    text-decoration:
    none;
}

pre {font-family: Times, Serif; margin-left: 15%; margin-right: 15%; font-size: 110%}

div.notebox {margin-left: 10%; margin-right: 10%; margin-top: 5%; /* makes box around Transcriber's Notes */
             margin-bottom: 5%; padding: 1em; border: solid black 1px;}

ins.greek {text-decoration: none; border-bottom: thin dotted}

    </style><style class="darkreader darkreader--sync" media="screen"></style>
  </head>
<body>

<p><b>* A Distributed Proofreaders Canada eBook *</b></p>

<p>This eBook is made available at no cost and with very few
restrictions. These restrictions apply only if (1) you make
a change in the eBook (other than alteration for different
display devices), or (2) you are making commercial use of
the eBook. If either of these conditions applies, please
check with an FP administrator before proceeding.</p>

<p>This work is in the Canadian public domain, but may be under
copyright in some countries. If you live outside Canada, check your
country's copyright laws. <b>If the book is under copyright
in your country, do not download or redistribute this file.</b></p>


<p><i>Title:</i> The Eumenides (The Furies) of Aeschylus</p>
<p><i>Date of first publication:</i> 1915</p>
<p><i>Author:</i> Aeschylus (525-456 BCE)</p>
<p><i>Author and Translator:</i> Gilbert Murray (1866-1957)</p>
<p><i>Date first posted:</i> November 4 2012</p>
<p><i>Date last updated:</i> November 4 2012</p>
<p>Faded Page eBook #20121108</p>

<p>
This ebook was produced by: James Wright
&amp; the Online Distributed Proofreading Canada Team at http://www.pgdpcanada.net
</p>
<p><br><br><br><br></p>

<div class="notebox">
<p>Greek words that may not display correctly in all browsers are
transliterated in the text using popups like this:
<ins class="greek" title="biblos">βιβλος</ins>.
Position your mouse over the line to see the transliteration.
</p></div>

<p><br><br></p>
<hr style="width: 65%;">
<p><br><br></p>

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_i" id="Page_i">[Pg i]</a></span></p>

<h2>THE EUMENIDES</h2>

<p class="center"><small>(THE FURIES)</small></p>

<h2>OF AESCHYLUS</h2>

<p><br><br></p>
<hr style="width: 65%;">
<p><br><br></p>

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_iii" id="Page_iii">[Pg iii]</a></span></p>

<h2>THE EUMENIDES</h2>

<p class="center"><small>(THE FURIES)</small></p>

<h2>OF AESCHYLUS</h2>

<p><br><br></p>

<p class="smcen2">TRANSLATED INTO RHYMING VERSE<br><br>
BY</p>
<p class="center">GILBERT MURRAY</p>
<p class="smcen2">REGIUS PROFESSOR OF GREEK IN THE UNIVERSITY OF OXFORD</p>

<p><br><br><br><br></p>

<p class="smcen">LONDON: GEORGE ALLEN &amp; UNWIN LTD.<br>
RUSKIN HOUSE, 40 MUSEUM STREET, W.C.1</p>

<p><br><br></p>
<hr style="width: 65%;">
<p><br><br></p>

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_iv" id="Page_iv">[Pg iv]</a></span></p>

<p><br><br></p>

<p class="smcen2"><i>First published in 1925</i></p>

<p><br><br></p>

<p class="smcen2"><i>Printed in Great Britain by</i><br>
UNWIN BROTHERS, LIMITED, LONDON AND WOKING<br>
<br>
(<i>All rights reserved</i>)</p>

<p><br><br></p>
<hr style="width: 65%;">
<p><br><br></p>


<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_v" id="Page_v">[Pg v]</a></span></p>



<h3>INTRODUCTION</h3>
<p><br></p>

<p>We have seen in the <i>Agamemnon</i> how the law that "The doer must suffer,"
or that Sin must bring Punishment, is mainly envisaged by the most
primitive Greek tradition as a form of the blood-feud. It is blood
calling for blood. At its simplest this takes the form of a
straightforward vendetta, as when a man kills one of another tribe.
There is no "sin" or "pollution" in this, though of course the kindred
of the stranger will duly try to avenge him. Suppose, next, that a man
kills, not a stranger, but his own kinsman. Then he has shed the
"kindred blood," and committed a real sin. He is polluted, and pollutes
all who associate with him. If the kinsman has left any children or male
representatives, they are bound in honour to take up the blood-feud and
do vengeance, even though, if the relationship is very close, it may
bring pollution on them. Thus Aegisthus, as son of Thyestes, acted quite
correctly in killing Agamemnon, and Orestes in killing him. Similarly,
when Clytemnestra killed Agamemnon the eternal law compelled Orestes to
avenge him, however reluctantly.</p>

<p>But suppose there is no avenger left, what then? It is one of the fears
that torment Orestes in Euripides' <i>Electra</i>, "Who will do justice on
me, when she is dead?" In that case, though there is no visible human
avenger, the Law nevertheless acts. The doer must<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_vi" id="Page_vi">[Pg vi]</a></span> suffer. That is
<i>Dikê</i>, Justice. It is the law of Themis, of Moira, of the Erinyes, and
ultimately of Mother Earth. Let us consider each of these conceptions
separately.</p>

<p>Themis, as Dr. Jane Harrison has shown, is the correct tribal custom,
the thing that is always done—always, that is, by the people who really
know. When prodigies occur, or bewildering emergencies, and you do not
know what to do, you consult the elders or other authorities on ritual
and precedent. If they fail you, you go to an oracle and consult the
great ancestors, the "Earthy" or "Underworld" people, called
<i>Chthonioi</i>, lying in the bosom of the earth. They tell you what is
Themis; and that is why Themis presides at Delphi.</p>

<p>Moira is commonly translated "Fate," but more strictly it is the
"portion" allotted to every man, god, or city. Each of us must fulfil
his portion; he cannot escape it: he must not exceed it nor trespass on
the Moira of another. And the Moirai, when personified, are the
Assigners or Apportioners of man's lot in life. One is reminded of the
conception of Righteousness in Plato's Republic, where every man fulfils
his "portion" of service to the community.</p>

<p>And the Erinyes. They are the wrath of the dead or the injured acting as
a curse and pursuing the transgressor. Orestes, in the <i>Choëphoroe</i>,
sees them as "his mother's wrathful hounds." In this play we see
Clytemnestra waken them when they have fallen asleep. They are obedient
to her wrath, for they are her wrath in personal form. And such wrath,
though chiefly conceived as the blood-feud of the murdered, can be
roused by any <i>Hubris</i> or overstepping of Moira. In the <i>Agamemnon</i> the
Erinys avenges the vulture whose nest has been robbed. And in the Iliad,
at the great moment when Achilles' horse breaks into<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_vii" id="Page_vii">[Pg vii]</a></span> speech to warn his
master of approaching death, the Erinyes "check his voice" (Il. xix.
418). The horse, however well-intentioned, was obviously transgressing
his Moira.</p>

<p>So far we can follow the ancient ideas without much difficulty. But it
is rather a surprise to the modern to find Mother Earth among the
supreme authorities for executing this law. It is because Earth is the
home of the dead, the Chthonian people, both the great ancestors who
know what is Themis and "the wronged ones in the darkness" who cry for
justice on their oppressors. Their wrath is her wrath. Besides that,
whenever kindred blood is shed, the intolerable stain falls first and
most directly on the face of Mother Earth. It pollutes her, and she
sends up her punishments from below, blight and barrenness and plague,
just as to the innocent in normal times she sends life and fruitfulness.
Thus we see that blessing as well as cursing lies in the power of the
Chthonian people, the dead, the Erinyes, and collectively of Mother
Earth. They who send can also withhold.</p>

<p>The law that "The doer shall suffer" is a natural law like the maturing
of seed, or the return of spring; most of all like the growth and
diminishing every year of the power of the Sun. For that diminishing is
really a punishment due to the <i>Hubris</i> which the Sun committed when at
his height. There are suggestions occasionally that, since every living
thing has its own Moira, one Moira might conceivably interfere with
another, just as sometimes God may prevent the seed from maturing
(<i>Agamemnon</i>, l. 1025). But in the main the rule that blood calls for
blood, that <i>Hubris</i> goes before a fall, or that sin brings punishment,
stands as an unbroken natural law, and the Erinyes are its especial
guardians.</p>

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_viii" id="Page_viii">[Pg viii]</a></span></p>

<p>That being so, how can there be any forgiveness? Would not forgiveness
be a sort of monstrosity, a wanton breach in the law of Cause and
Effect? Aeschylus, in the <i>Agamemnon</i>, gives his answer in unusually
clear language (161-182). The prophet Calchas has been describing the
ravenous feast of the two Eagles; the wrath of Artemis thereat and the
vengeance exacted in the death of Iphigenia; the future vengeance to be
exacted for that death; and beyond a yet further vista of vengeances
re-avenged. Then Aeschylus asks how man can find escape from this
endless chain and "cast off from his mind the burden of futility."
"Only," he answers, "in the thought of Zeus, whatever Zeus may be." It
is a Zeus sublimated by the mind of Aeschylus and very different from
that glorified Achaean chieftain who was King of gods and men in the
ordinary Homeric tradition. To Aeschylus Zeus, as the ruler of heaven,
is the founder of a new world, much as Athena herself was the founder of
a new civilization on earth. The old gods struck and were stricken; they
fought and they passed away. One had no more meaning than another. But
Zeus is "He who made a road to Thought, who established Learning by
Suffering to be an abiding law." He himself in the distant past won his
throne by violence, but now he has learned and his heart is changed.</p>

<p>This idea of a supreme Ruler who, though inscrutably wise, is not
perfect but only working his way towards perfection, was developed by
Aeschylus in the <i>Prometheus-trilogy</i>, where Zeus, beginning as a
conqueror and a tyrant, seems at first like the villain of the piece.
But he possesses this peculiar secret: he can learn by his own offences;
so the end is reconciliation. Similarly in the <i>Supplices</i> we hear how
Io, once the persecuted victim of his lust, is at last led to<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_ix" id="Page_ix">[Pg ix]</a></span> peace and
blessedness and becomes the Virgin Mother of the Deliverer of
Prometheus.<a name="FNanchor_1_1" id="FNanchor_1_1"></a><a href="#Footnote_1_1" class="fnanchor">[1]</a> The idea is not purely Aeschylean, for Pindar also tells
us how Eternal Zeus set free his chained enemies, the Titans (<i>Pyth.</i>
iv. 291). It is also he who instituted the law of the suppliant. He
forgave the blood-stained Ixion because of his suffering and prayer.
Nay, he is not only the protector of suppliants, he is himself the
Eternal Suppliant, the God and Master of all things, who forgives
because he also craves for forgiveness (<i>Supplices</i>, l. 1). There,
however, we touch upon a mystery. . . . The essential point is that the
Zeus who learns and understands is also the Zeus who can forgive the
sinner. He can forgive just because he understands. The Law of the
Moirai and the Erinyes neither understands nor forgives. It simply
operates.</p>

<p>"All this," it may be said, "is possible enough, but it is not what
Aeschylus represents as occurring. Zeus does not appear at all in the
<i>Eumenides</i>." Of course he does not. The Greek convention, like our own,
did not easily represent the Supreme Father in bodily form on the stage.
Apart from satyr-plays and comedy, I only know of one play, <i>The Soul
Weighing</i> of Aeschylus, in which Zeus was actually represented; and
there he appears not on the stage but in the sky, holding the divine
balance. In the Eumenides he is represented by his son and daughter,
Apollo and Athena.</p>

<p>Apollo, we are told expressly, is "the <i>Prophêtês Dios</i>, the revealer of
Zeus" (19). He says himself, "Never have I spoken on my throne of
prophecy any word concerning man, woman or city, which was not commanded
by Zeus the Father" (616). He warns the Court not to disregard the
oracles "that<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_x" id="Page_x">[Pg x]</a></span> are mine and the Father's" (713). Consequently we see
that it was by the will of Zeus himself that Orestes slew his mother, it
is Zeus who wills now that he be set free.</p>

<p>Athena likewise, we are told with emphasis, is the daughter of Zeus
alone, with no mother. She is pure, undiluted Zeus (664 ff.). She is, so
to speak, his Thought, not born by any bodily process, but sprung
directly from his brain (665); and when she gives her vote it is not so
much that she votes on the side of Zeus but that her judgement
inevitably is the same as his, "for I am utterly the Father's" (738).
When she asks the Furies to yield to the will of Zeus she says, "I also
trust and obey him. I know his overwhelming strength, but He needs it
not!" (826). And she explains that Zeus has given to her just that power
of thinking and understanding (<ins class="greek" title="to phronein">τὸ φρονεῖν</ins>) to which
we were told in the <i>Agamemnon</i> that he was guiding mankind. Thus the
mechanical and automatic operation of the Law is corrected by the will
of the Father. It is not broken, but more truly and perfectly fulfilled.</p>

<p>One is reminded of a passage in Plato's <i>Statesman</i>: "The best of all is
not that a law should rule, but a man, if the man be wise and of royal
nature. . . . A law can never comprehend exactly what is noblest and
most just for all cases, and consequently cannot enjoin what is best.
The infinite varieties of men and circumstances, and the fact that
nothing human ever for a moment stands still, make it impossible for any
art to lay down a simple rule to hold universally and for all time. . . .
But that is what we see the law aiming at, like some stubborn and
ignorant man who will allow nothing to be done against his orders and no
further question to be asked . . ." (p. 294<i>a</i>).</p>

<p>Equally near to Aeschylus is Aristotle's famous<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_xi" id="Page_xi">[Pg xi]</a></span> discussion of the
difference between legal justice and that higher justice which he calls
<i>Epieikeia</i> (Equity). "It is the correction of the law where it fails
owing to its generality" (<i>Ethics</i>, v. p. 1137 <i>b</i>, 26), and the
correction has to be applied by the "wise man." In Aeschylus as in these
two philosophers the ultimate justice is to be found in an appeal from a
law to a person.</p>

<p>This appeal plays an important role in the history of Greek thought, and
consequently in that of all modern Europe. The other philosophic schools
of the Hellenistic Age, Cynic, Stoic, and Epicurean, made even greater
use than Plato and Aristotle of the idea of the Wise Man, rather than
the Law, as the judge and embodiment of right conduct. In a grosser form
the idea invaded practical politics. We find the Hellenistic world
escaping from the conflict of constitutions and systems of law by the
deification of Alexander and his successors, and cutting its juridical
knots by the legal fiction of the divine will. Nay, even before
Aeschylus set to work upon it, the same conception was really implicit
in the anthropomorphism of the classical Olympian religion. As I have
tried to show elsewhere,<a name="FNanchor_2_2" id="FNanchor_2_2"></a><a href="#Footnote_2_2" class="fnanchor">[2]</a> the great advance made by that system as
compared with the welter of primitive tabus and terrors which it tried,
however artificially and inadequately, to supersede, lies in this same
humanizing of the non-human. It brought to man the Good News that, as
Plutarch expresses it, "the world is not ruled by fabulous Typhons and
Giants"—nor, we may add, by blind mechanical laws—"but by One who is a
wise Father to all." It sought to make religion humane at the expense of
making it anthropomorphic.</p>

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_xii" id="Page_xii">[Pg xii]</a></span></p>

<p>It is more interesting still to realize that the Aeschylean doctrine is
in essence an early and less elaborate stage of the theological system
which we associate with St. Paul: the suppression of the Law by a
personal relation to a divine person, and a consequent disregard for the
crude coarse test of a man's "works" or "deeds" in comparison with the
one unfailing test of the spirit, its "faith" or "faithfulness" towards
God. Aeschylus would have understood Paul's exhortation to escape beyond
the "beggarly elements" to Him who made them, beyond the Creation to the
Creator; and Paul would have understood Aeschylus' insistence on the
forgiveness of the suppliant, that is, of him who believes and repents
and prays. It is noteworthy, indeed, that Paul made one great concession
to primitive thought which Aeschylus had entirely rejected. When Orestes
is pardoned by the will of Zeus, the Furies yield; the Law is deemed to
be satisfied; there is no talk of its demanding to be paid off with
another victim. But in Paul, when man is to be forgiven, the sin still
claims its punishment, the blood will still have blood; and the only way
to appease it is for the Divine King, himself or his son, to "die for
the people." Thus the pollution is cleansed and sin duly paid with
blood, though it happens to be the blood of the innocent. Aeschylus, as
a poet, was familiar with that conception. He knew how Codrus died, and
Menoikeus and Macaria, how Agamemnon and Erechtheus and other kings had
given their children to die. But for him such practices belonged to that
primitive and barbaric world which Hellenic Zeus had swept away, so he
hoped, for ever.</p>

<p>A modern reader is more likely to ask why, if Orestes only fulfilled the
command of Zeus, he should be punished at all. Why is there any talk of
suffering<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_xiii" id="Page_xiii">[Pg xiii]</a></span> and forgiveness? The answer is quite straightforward. He has
after all broken the Law; he has offended against Themis and Moira, and
he must suffer. In modern language, a man who kills his mother, even if
he is amply justified in doing so, is bound to suffer acute grief and
distress; if he did not, he would really deserve to be punished. It is
only in the end that Zeus can overrule and make good, just as he did
with Io and with Prometheus. It is in the end, after suffering and
struggle, after cleansing and supplication, that union is achieved
between the Law which acts like blind fate and the Father who
understands.<a name="FNanchor_3_3" id="FNanchor_3_3"></a><a href="#Footnote_3_3" class="fnanchor">[3]</a></p>

<p>Thus at last the offender who deserves pardon can be pardoned. But that
is not all. The Law that can pardon and understand can itself be
understood and loved. Its ministers are no longer alien and hostile
beings, proud of the agonies which they righteously inflict and the
hatred which they naturally inspire. They are accepted by Athena as
fellow-citizens, and their Law recognized as an inward aspiration, a
standard of right living which men consciously need and seek. The
"Furies" have become "Eumenides."</p>

<p><br><br></p>

<div class="footnote"><p><a name="Footnote_1_1" id="Footnote_1_1"></a><a href="#FNanchor_1_1"><span class="label">[1]</span></a> See <i>Rise of the Greek Epic</i>, Edn. 3, p. 276 ff.</p></div>

<div class="footnote"><p><a name="Footnote_2_2" id="Footnote_2_2"></a><a href="#FNanchor_2_2"><span class="label">[2]</span></a> <i>Five Stages of Greek Religion</i>, Chapter II.</p></div>

<div class="footnote"><p><a name="Footnote_3_3" id="Footnote_3_3"></a><a href="#FNanchor_3_3"><span class="label">[3]</span></a> See the last verses of the play. On the political
circumstances which gave point to the poet's doctrine of Reconciliation
see note on vv. <a href="#Page_61">682</a> and <a href="#Page_62">864</a>.</p></div>

<p><br><br></p>
<hr style="width: 65%;">
<p><br><br></p>

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_xv" id="Page_xv">[Pg xv]</a></span></p>



<p class="center">CHARACTERS IN THE PLAY</p>

<p class="dramper">
<i>The</i> <span class="smcap">Pythian Prophetess</span>.<br>
<span class="smcap">Orestes.</span><br>
<i>The God</i> <span class="smcap">Apollo</span>.<br>
<i>The Goddess</i> <span class="smcap">Pallas Athena</span>.<br>
<i>The Ghost of</i> <span class="smcap">Clytemnestra</span>.<br>
<span class="smcap">Chorus of Furies</span> (<i>Eumenides</i>).<br>
<span class="smcap">Chorus of Athenian Citizens.</span><br>
</p>

<p><br></p>

<p class="direct4"><i>The play was first produced in the Archonship of Philocles</i>
(458 <span class="smcap">b.c.</span>). <i>The first prize was won by Aeschylus
with the "Agamemnon," "Choëphoroe" and "Eumenides"
and the Satyr-play "Proteus."</i></p>

<p><br><br></p>
<hr style="width: 65%;">
<p><br><br></p>

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_1" id="Page_1">[Pg 1&nbsp;&nbsp;vv. 1-17]</a></span></p>

<h3>THE EUMENIDES</h3>

<p><br></p>
<p class="direct1"><i>The Scene represents the front of the Temple of</i> <span class="smcap">Apollo</span>
<i>at Delphi; great doors at the back lead to the
inner shrine and the central Altar. The Pythian</i>
<span class="smcap">Prophetess</span> <i>is standing before the Doors</i>.<br></p>

<p class="char"><span class="smcap">Prophetess.</span></p>

<pre>First of all Gods I worship in this prayer
Earth, the primeval prophet; after her
Themis, the Wise, who on her mother's throne—
So runs the tale—sat second; by whose own
Accepted will, with never strife nor stress,
Third reigned another earth-born Titaness,
Phoebê; from whom (for that he bears her name)
To Phoebus as a birthtide gift it came.
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">He left his isle, he left his Delian seas,</span>
He passed Athena's wave-worn promontories,
In haste this great Parnassus to possess
And Delphi, thronèd in the wilderness.
And with him came, to escort him and revere,
A folk born of Hephaistos, pioneer
Of God's way, making sweet a bitter land.
And much this people and the King whose hand
Then steered them, Delphos, glorified his name,
Till Zeus into his heart put mystic flame
And prophet here enthroned him, fourth in use:<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_2" id="Page_2">[Pg 2&nbsp;&nbsp;vv. 18-40]</a></span>
So Loxias' lips reveal the thought of Zeus.
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">These gods be foremost in all prayers of mine,</span>
Who have held the Throne. Next, She before the shrine,
Pallas, is praisèd, and the Nymphs who keep
Yon old Corycian bird-belovèd steep,
Deep-caverned, where things blessèd come and go.
And Bromios walks the mountain, well I know,
Since first he led his Maenad host on high
And doomed King Pentheus like a hare to die.
And Pleistos' fountains and Poseidon's power
I call, and Him who brings the Perfect Hour,
Zeus, the Most Highest. With which prayers I go
To seat me, priestess, on the Throne. And, oh,
May God send blessing on mine entrance, more
And deeper than He e'er hath sent of yore!
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">If there be present men of Greece but not</span>
Of Delphi, let them enter as the lot
Ordains; I speak but as God leadeth me.
</pre>

<p class="direct3">[<i>She enters the Inner Shrine, and the stage
is for a moment empty. Then she
returns, grasping at the wall for
support.</i></p>

<pre>Ah! Horrors, horrors, dire to speak or see,
From Loxias' chamber drive me reeling back.
My knees are weak beneath me, and I lack
The strength to fly.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. O hands, drag me from here
If feet fail!&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. An old woman, and in fear,
A thing of naught, a babe in helplessness!
I made my way into the Holy Place,
And there, at the inmost Altar of the world,
A man abhorred of God, his body hurled
Earthward in desperate prayer; blood on his hand<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_3" id="Page_3">[Pg 3&nbsp;&nbsp;vv. 41-67]</a></span>
Yet reeking, and a naked new-drawn brand
Wreathed in beseeching wool, a suppliant's weed
Of snow-white fleece&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. so much mine eyes could read.
But out in front of him a rout unknown
Of women sleepeth, flung from throne to throne.
Women? Nay, never women! Gorgons more:
And yet not like the Gorgon shapes of yore.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.
I saw a picture once of woman things
That ravished Phineus' banquet. But no wings
Have these; all shadows, black, abominable.
The voices of their slumber rise and swell,
Back-beating, and their eyes drop gouts of gore.
Their garb, it is no garb to show before
God's altar nor the hearths of human kind.
I cannot read what lineage lies behind
These shapes, nor what land, having born such breed,
Hath trembled not before and shall not bleed
Hereafter. Let Apollo great in power
Take to his care the peril of this hour:
Being Helper, Prophet, Seer of things unseen,
The stainèd hearth he knoweth to make clean.
</pre>

<p class="direct3">[<i>The</i> <span class="smcap">Prophetess</span> <i>departs. The doors open
and reveal the inner shrine</i>, <span class="smcap">Orestes</span>
<i>at the Altar, the</i> <span class="smcap">Furies</span> <i>asleep about
him, and</i> <span class="smcap">Apollo</span> <i>standing over them</i>.</p>

<p class="char"><span class="smcap">Apollo.</span></p>

<pre>I fail thee not. For ever more I stay,
Or watching at thy side or far away,
Thy guard, and iron against thine enemies.
Even now my snares have closèd upon these,
The ragers sleep: the Virgins without love,<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_4" id="Page_4">[Pg 4&nbsp;&nbsp;vv. 68-90]</a></span>
So grey, so old, whom never god above
Hath kissed, nor man, nor from the wilderness
One wild beast. They were born for wickedness
And sorrow; for in evil night they dwell,
And feed on the great darkness that is Hell,
Most hated by the Gods and human thought.
But none the less, fly thou and falter not.
For these shall hunt thee, ever on through earth
Unwandered, through the vast lands of the North,
The sea-ways and the cities ringed with sea.
But faint not. Clasp thy travail unto thee;
On till thou come to Pallas' Rock, and fold
Thine arms in prayer about her image old.
In Athens there be hearts to judge, there be
Words that bring peace; and I shall set thee free
At last from all this woe.—If thou didst kill
Thy mother, was it not my word and will?
</pre>

<p class="char"><span class="smcap">Orestes.</span></p>

<pre>Not to betray thou knowest. Oh, ponder yet
One other lesson, Lord—not to forget!
Thy strength in doing can be trusted well.
<span style="margin-left: 12em;">[<span class="smcap">Orestes</span> <i>departs</i>.</span>
</pre>


<p class="char"><span class="smcap">Apollo.</span></p>

<pre>Remember! Let no fear thy spirit quell!
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">Do thou, O Hermes, brother of my blood,</span>
Watch over him. Thou guide of man, make good
The name thou bearest, shepherding again
My suppliant. Him who pitieth suffering men<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_5" id="Page_5">[Pg 5&nbsp;&nbsp;vv. 91-116]</a></span>
Zeus pitieth, and his ways are sweet on earth.
</pre>

<p class="direct3">[<i>Exit</i> <span class="smcap">Apollo</span>. <i>Presently enter the</i> <span class="smcap">Ghost</span>
<i>of</i> <span class="smcap">Clytemnestra</span>. <i>She watches the
sleeping</i> <span class="smcap">Furies</span>.</p>

<p class="char"><span class="smcap">Ghost.</span></p>

<pre>Ye sleep. O God, and what are sleepers worth?
'Tis you, have left me among all the dead
Dishonoured. Alway, for that blood I shed,
Rebuke and hissing cease not, and I go
Wandering in shame. Oh, hear!&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. For that old blow
I struck still I am hated, but for his
Who smote me, being of my blood, there is
No wrath in all the darkness: there is none
Cares for a mother murdered by her son.
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">Open thine heart to see this gash!—(<i>She shows the</i></span>
<span style="margin-left: 3em;"><i>wound in her throat.</i>) In sleep</span>
The heart hath many eyes and can see deep:
'Tis daylight makes man's fate invisible.
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">Oft of my bounty ye have lapt your fill;</span>
Oft the sad peace of wineless cups to earth
I have poured, and midmurk feastings on your hearth
Burned, when no other god draws near to eat.
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">And all these things ye have cast beneath your feet,</span>
And he is fled, fled lightly like a fawn
Out of your nets! With mocking he is gone
And twisting of the lips.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. I charge you, hark!
This is my life, my death. Oh, shake the dark
From off you, Children of the Deep. 'Tis I,
Your dream, I, Clytemnestra, stand and cry.
<span style="margin-left: 8.5em;">[<i>Moaning among the</i> <span class="smcap">Furies</span>.</span>
Moan on, but he is vanished and forgot.<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_6" id="Page_6">[Pg 6&nbsp;&nbsp;vv. 117-142]</a></span>
So strong the prayers of them that love me not!
<span style="margin-left: 16.5em;">[<i>Moaning.</i></span>
Too sound ye sleep.—And have ye for the dead
No pity?&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. And my son, my murderer, fled!
<span style="margin-left: 16.5em;">[<i>Groaning.</i></span>
Ye groan; ye slumber. Wake!&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. What task have ye
To do on earth save to work misery?
<span style="margin-left: 16.5em;">[<i>Groaning.</i></span>
Can sleep and weariness so well conspire
To drain the fell she-dragon of her fire?
</pre>

<p class="direct3">[<i>Sharp repeated muttering: then words "At
him! At him! Catch, catch, catch!
Ah, beware!"</i></p>

<pre>Ah, hunting in your dreams, and clamorous yet,
Tired bloodhounds that can sleep but not forget!
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">How now? Awake! Be strong! And faithful keep</span>
Thy lust of pain through all the drugs of sleep.
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">Thou feelst my scorn? Aye, feel and agonize</span>
Within; such words are scourges to the wise.
Thy blood-mist fold about him, like a doom.
Waste him with vapour from thy burning womb.
A second chase is death!&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Pursue! Pursue!
</pre>

<p class="direct3">[<i>The</i> <span class="smcap">Ghost</span> <i>vanishes as the</i> <span class="smcap">Furies</span> <i>gradually
wake</i>.</p>

<p class="char"><span class="smcap">Leader of the Furies.</span></p>

<pre>Awake! Quick, waken her as I wake you!
Thou sleepest? Rise; cast slumber from thy brain
And search. Is our first hunt so all in vain?
</pre>

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_7" id="Page_7">[Pg 7&nbsp;&nbsp;vv. 143-161]</a></span></p>

<p class="char"><span class="smcap">Furies</span>&nbsp;&nbsp; (<i>speaking severally</i>).</p>

<pre>—O rage, rage and wrath! Friends, they have done me wrong!
—&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Many and many a wrong I have suffered, mockeries all!
—Evil and violent deeds, a shame that lingereth long
<span style="margin-left: 4em;">And bitter, bitter as gall!</span>
—The beast is out of the toils, out of the toils and away!
—&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;I slept, and I lost my prey.

—What art thou, O Child of Zeus? A thief and a cozener!
—&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Hast broken beneath thy wheels them that were holy and old?
—A godless man and an evil son, he but kneels in prayer,
<span style="margin-left: 4em;">And straight he is ta'en to thy fold.</span>
—Thou hast chosen the man who spilt his mother's blood!
—&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Are these things just, thou God?

—As a raging charioteer mid-grippeth his goad to bite
<span style="margin-left: 4em;">Beneath the belly, beneath the flank, where the smart is hot,</span>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">There riseth out of my dreams Derision with hands to smite;</span>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">As a wretch at the block is scourged when the scourger hateth aright,</span>
<span style="margin-left: 4em;">And the shuddering pain dies not.</span>

—These be the deeds ye do, ye Gods of the younger race:<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_8" id="Page_8">[Pg 8&nbsp;&nbsp;vv. 162-182]</a></span>
<span style="margin-left: 4em;">Ye break the Law at your will; your high throne drips with gore,</span>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">The foot is wet and the head. There is blood in the Holy Place!</span>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">The Heart of Earth uplifteth its foulness in all men's face,</span>
<span style="margin-left: 4em;">Clean nevermore, nevermore!</span>

—Blood, thou holy Seer, there is blood on thy burning hearth.
<span style="margin-left: 4em;">Thine inmost place is defiled, and thine was the will and the word.</span>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">Thou hast broken the Law of Heaven, exalted the things of Earth;</span>
<span style="margin-left: 4em;">The hallowed Portions of old thine hand hath blurred.</span>

—Thou knowest to hurt my soul; yea, but shalt save not him.
<span style="margin-left: 4em;">The earth may open and hide, but never shall he be freed.</span>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">Defiling all he goes, there where in exile dim</span>
<span style="margin-left: 4em;">Many defilers more wait and bleed.</span>
</pre>

<p class="char"><i>Enter</i> <span class="smcap">Apollo</span>.</p>

<p class="char"><span class="smcap">Apollo.</span></p>

<pre>Avaunt, I charge you! Get ye from my door!
Darken this visionary dome no more!
Quick, lest ye meet that snake of bitter wing
That leaps a-sudden from my golden string,
And in your agony spue forth again<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_9" id="Page_9">[Pg 9&nbsp;&nbsp;vv. 183-202]</a></span>
The black froth ye have sucked from tortured men!
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">This floor shall be no harbour to your feet.</span>
Are there not realms where Law upon her seat
Smites living head from trunk? Where prisoners bleed
From gougèd eyes? Children with manhood's seed
Blasted are there; maimed foot and severed hand,
And stoning, and a moan through all the land
Of men impaled to die. There is the board
Whereat ye feast, and, feasting, are abhorred
Of heaven.—But all the shapes of you declare
Your souls within. Some reeking lion's lair
Were your fit dwelling, not this cloistered Hall
Of Mercy, which your foulness chokes withal.
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">Out, ye wild goats unherded! Out, ye drove</span>
Accursed, that god nor devil dares to love!
</pre>

<p class="direct3">[<i>During this speech the</i> <span class="smcap">Furies</span> <i>fly confusedly
from the Temple down into the Orchestra.
The</i> <span class="smcap">Leader</span> <i>turns</i>.</p>

<p class="char"><span class="smcap">Leader.</span></p>

<pre>Phoebus Apollo, in thy turn give heed!
I hold thee not a partner in this deed;
Thou hast wrought it all. The guilt is thine alone.
</pre>

<p class="char"><span class="smcap">Apollo.</span></p>

<pre>What sayst thou there?—One word, and then begone.
</pre>

<p class="char"><span class="smcap">Leader.</span></p>

<pre>Thou spakest and this man his mother slew.
</pre>

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_10" id="Page_10">[Pg 10&nbsp;&nbsp;vv. 203-212]</a></span></p>

<p class="char"><span class="smcap">Apollo.</span></p>

<pre>I spoke, and he avenged his father. True.
</pre>

<p class="char"><span class="smcap">Leader.</span></p>

<pre>Thou stoodest by, to accept the new-shed gore.
</pre>

<p class="char"><span class="smcap">Apollo.</span></p>

<pre>I bade him turn for cleansing to my door.
</pre>

<p class="char"><span class="smcap">Leader.</span></p>

<pre>Ha! And revilest us who guide his feet?
</pre>

<p class="char"><span class="smcap">Apollo.</span></p>

<pre>Ye be not clean to approach this Mercy Seat.
</pre>

<p class="char"><span class="smcap">Leader.</span></p>

<pre>We be by Law eternal what we be.
</pre>

<p class="char"><span class="smcap">Apollo.</span></p>

<pre>And what is that? Reveal thy dignity.
</pre>

<p class="char"><span class="smcap">Leader.</span></p>

<pre>We hunt from home his mother's murderer.
</pre>

<p class="char"><span class="smcap">Apollo.</span></p>

<pre>A husband-murdering woman, what of her?
</pre>

<p class="char"><span class="smcap">Leader.</span></p>

<pre>'Twas not one blood in slayer and in slain.
</pre>

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_11" id="Page_11">[Pg 11&nbsp;&nbsp;vv. 213-231]</a></span></p>

<p class="char"><span class="smcap">Apollo.</span></p>

<pre>How? Would ye count as a light thing and vain
The perfect bond of Hera and high Zeus?
Yea, and thy word dishonoured too the use
Of Cypris, whence love groweth to his best.
The fate-ordainèd meeting, breast to breast,
Of man and woman is a tie more sure
Than oath or pact, if Justice guards it pure.
If them so joined ye heed not when they slay,
Nor rise in wrath, nor smite them on their way,
Unrighteous is thine hunting of this man,
Orestes. Why on him is all thy ban
Unloosed? The other never broke thy rest&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.
But Pallas, child of Zeus, shall judge this quest.
</pre>

<p class="char"><span class="smcap">Leader.</span></p>

<pre>I cleave to him. I leave him never more.
</pre>

<p class="char"><span class="smcap">Apollo.</span></p>

<pre>Oh, hunt thy fill! Make sorrow doubly sore.
</pre>

<p class="char"><span class="smcap">Leader.</span></p>

<pre>Abridge not thou the Portions of my lot.
</pre>

<p class="char"><span class="smcap">Apollo.</span></p>

<pre>Keep thou thy portions. I will touch them not.
</pre>

<p class="char"><span class="smcap">Leader.</span></p>

<pre>Thou hast thy greatness by the throne of God;
I&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. But the scent draws of that mother's blood.
I come! I come! I hunt him to the grave.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.
</pre>

<p class="direct3">[<i>The</i> <span class="smcap">Furies</span> <i>go out on the track of</i> <span class="smcap">Orestes</span>.</p>

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_12" id="Page_12">[Pg 12&nbsp;&nbsp;vv. 232-245]</a></span></p>

<p class="char"><span class="smcap">Apollo.</span></p>

<pre>'Tis mine then to bring succour, and to save
My suppliant. Earth and Heaven are both afraid
For God's wrath, if one helpless is betrayed.
</pre>

<p class="direct3">[<span class="smcap">Apollo</span> <i>returns behind the shrine, and the
doors close. When they open again,
they reveal, in place of</i> <span class="smcap">Apollo's</span> <i>Central
Altar, the Statue of</i> <span class="smcap">Athena Parthenos</span>:
<i>the scene now represents the
Temple of Athena in Athens</i>.</p>

<p class="char"><i>Enter</i> <span class="smcap">Orestes</span>, <i>worn with travel and suffering</i>.</p>

<p class="char"><span class="smcap">Orestes.</span></p>

<pre>Pallas Athena, from Apollo's wing
I come; receive in peace this hunted thing
My sin no more polluteth, nor with hand
Unpurified before thy throne I stand.
A blunted edge, grief-worn and sanctified
By pain, where'er men traffic or abide,
On, on, o'er land and sea I have made my way,
True-purposed Loxias' bidding to obey.
At last I have found thy House; thine image I
Clasp, and here wait thy judgement till I die.
</pre>

<p class="direct3">[<i>He throws himself down at the feet of the
Statue, but no answer comes. Presently
enter the</i> <span class="smcap">Furies</span>, <i>following him</i>.</p>

<p class="char"><span class="smcap">Leader.</span></p>

<pre>Ha! Here he has passed. Spot reeketh upon spot.
Blood is a spy that points and babbles not.
Like hounds that follow some sore-wounded fawn,<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_13" id="Page_13">[Pg 13&nbsp;&nbsp;vv. 246-265]</a></span>
We smell the way that blood and tears are gone,
And follow.—Oh, my belly gaspeth sore
With toils man-wasting; I can chase no more.
Through all the ways of the world I have shepherded
My lost sheep, and above the salt sea sped,
Wingless pursuing, swift as any sail.
And now 'tis here, meseemeth, he doth quail
And cower.—Aye, surely it is here; the smell
Of man's blood laughs to meet me. All is well.
</pre>

<p class="char"><span class="smcap">Furies</span>&nbsp;&nbsp; (<i>searching</i>).</p>

<pre><span style="margin-left: 3em;">Ha, search, search again!</span>
<span style="margin-left: 4em;">Seek for him far and wide.</span>
<span style="margin-left: 4em;">Shall this man fly or hide</span>
<span style="margin-left: 3em;">And the unatonèd stain</span>
<span style="margin-left: 3em;">Of his mother's blood be vain?</span>
<span style="margin-left: 3em;">Haha! Lo where he lies!</span>
<span style="margin-left: 3em;">And comfort is in his eyes!</span>
<span style="margin-left: 3em;">He hath made his arms a wreath</span>
<span style="margin-left: 4em;">For the knees of the Deathless One,</span>
<span style="margin-left: 3em;">And her judgement challengeth</span>
<span style="margin-left: 4em;">On the deed his hands have done.</span>
<span style="margin-left: 3em;">In vain! All in vain!</span>
<span style="margin-left: 4em;">When blood on the earth is shed,</span>
<span style="margin-left: 4em;">Blood of a mother dead,</span>
<span style="margin-left: 3em;">Ye shall gather it not again.</span>
<span style="margin-left: 4em;">'Tis wet, 'tis vanishèd,</span>
<span style="margin-left: 3em;">Down in the dust like rain.</span>
<span style="margin-left: 4em;">Thyself shalt yield instead,</span>
<span style="margin-left: 3em;">Living, from every vein,</span>
<span style="margin-left: 4em;">Thine own blood, rich and red,</span>
<span style="margin-left: 3em;">For our parchèd mouths to drain,</span><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_14" id="Page_14">[Pg 14&nbsp;&nbsp;vv. 266-285]</a></span>
<span style="margin-left: 4em;">Till my righteous heart be fed</span>
<span style="margin-left: 3em;">With thy blood and thy bitter pain;</span>
<span style="margin-left: 4em;">Till I waste thee like the dead,</span>
<span style="margin-left: 3em;">And cast thee among the slain,</span>
<span style="margin-left: 4em;">Till her wrong be comforted</span>
<span style="margin-left: 3em;">And her wound no longer stain.</span>

<span style="margin-left: 3em;">The Law thou then shalt see;</span>
<span style="margin-left: 4em;">That whoso of men hath trod</span>
<span style="margin-left: 3em;">In sin against these three,</span>
<span style="margin-left: 4em;">Parent or Guest or God,</span>
<span style="margin-left: 3em;">That sin is unforgot,</span>
<span style="margin-left: 3em;">And the payment faileth not.</span>
<span style="margin-left: 3em;">There liveth, for every man,</span>
<span style="margin-left: 4em;">Below, in the realm of Night,</span>
<span style="margin-left: 3em;">A judge who straighteneth</span>
<span style="margin-left: 3em;">The crooked; his name is Death.</span>
<span style="margin-left: 3em;">All life his eye doth scan</span>
<span style="margin-left: 4em;">And recordeth right.</span>
</pre>

<p class="char"><span class="smcap">Orestes.</span></p>

<pre>I have known much evil, and have learnt therein
What divers roads man goes to purge his sin,
And when to speak and when be dumb; and eke
In this thing a wise master bids me speak.
The blood upon this hand is fallen asleep
And fades. And though a sin be ne'er so deep
'Twill age with the aging years. When this of mine
Was fresh, on Phoebus' hearth with blood of swine
'Twas washed and blurred. 'Twere a long tale since then,
To tell how I have spoke with many men
In scatheless parle. And now, with lips of grace,<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_15" id="Page_15">[Pg 15&nbsp;&nbsp;vv. 286-311]</a></span>
Once more I pray the Lady of this place,
Athena, to mine aid. Let her but come;
Myself, mine Argive people and my home
Shall without war be hers, hers true of heart
And changeless. Therefore, wheresoe'er thou art,
In some far wilderness of Libyan earth,
By those Tritonid waters of thy birth;
Upgirt for deeds or veilèd on thy throne;
Or is it Phlegra's field thou brood'st upon,
Guiding the storm, like some bold Lord of War,
Oh, hear! A goddess heareth though afar:
Bring me deliverance in this mine hour!
<span style="margin-left: 3.5em;">[<i>He waits expectant, but there is no answer.</i></span>
</pre>

<p class="char"><span class="smcap">Leader.</span></p>

<pre>Not Lord Apollo's, not Athena's power
Shall reach thee any more. Forgot, forgot,
Thou reelest back to darkness, knowing not
Where in man's heart joy dwelleth; without blood,
A shadow, flung to devils for their food!
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">Wilt answer not my word? Wilt spurn thereat,</span>
Thou that art mine, born, doomed, and consecrate
My living feast, at no high altar slain?
Hark thou this song to bind thee like a chain!
</pre>

<p class="char"><span class="smcap">Furies</span>&nbsp;&nbsp; (<i>as they move into position for the Dance</i>).</p>

<pre><span style="margin-left: 3em;">Up, let us tread the dance, and wind—</span>
<span style="margin-left: 4em;">The hour is come!—our shuddering spell.</span>
<span style="margin-left: 4em;">Show how this Band apportions well</span>
<span style="margin-left: 3em;">Their fated burdens to mankind.</span>

<span style="margin-left: 3em;">Behold, we are righteous utterly.</span><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_16" id="Page_16">[Pg 16&nbsp;&nbsp;vv. 312-335]</a></span>
<span style="margin-left: 4em;">The man whose hand is clean, no wrath</span>
<span style="margin-left: 4em;">From us shall follow: down his path</span>
<span style="margin-left: 3em;">He goeth from all evil free.</span>

<span style="margin-left: 3em;">But whoso slays and hides withal</span>
<span style="margin-left: 4em;">His red hand, swift before his eyes</span>
<span style="margin-left: 4em;">True witness for the dead we rise:</span>
<span style="margin-left: 3em;">We are with him to the end of all.</span>
</pre>

<p class="direct5">[<i>Being now in position they begin
the Binding Song.</i></p>

<p class="char"><span class="smcap">Some Furies.</span></p>

<pre><span style="margin-left: 3em;">Mother, who didst bear a being</span>
<span style="margin-left: 3em;">Dread to the eyeless and the seeing,</span>
<span style="margin-left: 6em;">Night, my Mother!</span>
<span style="margin-left: 3em;">Leto's Child would wrong me, tear</span>
<span style="margin-left: 3em;">From my clutch this trembling hare,</span>
<span style="margin-left: 3em;">My doomèd prey: he bore to slay,</span>
<span style="margin-left: 3em;">And shall he not the cleansing bear,</span>
<span style="margin-left: 6em;">He, none other?</span>
</pre>

<p class="char"><span class="smcap">Chorus.</span></p>

<pre><span style="margin-left: 4em;">But our sacrifice to bind,</span>
<span style="margin-left: 4em;">Lo, the music that we wind,</span>
<span style="margin-left: 4em;">How it dazeth and amazeth</span>
<span style="margin-left: 5em;">And the will it maketh blind,</span>
<span style="margin-left: 4em;">As it moves without a lyre</span>
<span style="margin-left: 4em;">To the throb of my desire;</span>
<span style="margin-left: 4em;">'Tis a chain about the brain,</span>
<span style="margin-left: 5em;">'Tis a wasting of mankind.</span>
</pre>

<p class="char"><span class="smcap">Other Furies.</span></p>

<pre><span style="margin-left: 3em;">Thus hath Fate, through weal and woe,</span>
<span style="margin-left: 3em;">For our Portion as we go</span>
<span style="margin-left: 4em;">Spun the thread:</span><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_17" id="Page_17">[Pg 17&nbsp;&nbsp;vv. 336-356]</a></span>
<span style="margin-left: 3em;">Whenso mortal man in sin</span>
<span style="margin-left: 3em;">'Brueth hand against his kin,</span>
<span style="margin-left: 3em;">Mine till death He wandereth,</span>
<span style="margin-left: 3em;">And freedom never more shall win,</span>
<span style="margin-left: 5em;">Not when dead.</span>
</pre>

<p class="char"><span class="smcap">Chorus.</span></p>

<pre><span style="margin-left: 3em;">But our sacrifice to bind,</span>
<span style="margin-left: 3em;">Lo, the music that we wind,</span>
<span style="margin-left: 3em;">How it dazeth and amazeth</span>
<span style="margin-left: 5em;">And the will it maketh blind,</span>
<span style="margin-left: 3em;">As it moves without a lyre</span>
<span style="margin-left: 3em;">To the throb of my desire;</span>
<span style="margin-left: 3em;">'Tis a chain about the brain,</span>
<span style="margin-left: 5em;">'Tis a wasting of mankind.</span>
</pre>

<p class="char"><span class="smcap">Some Furies.</span></p>

<pre><span style="margin-left: 3em;">Since the hour we were begot</span>
<span style="margin-left: 5em;">Of this rite am I the priest;</span>
<span style="margin-left: 3em;">Other gods may share it not;</span>
<span style="margin-left: 5em;">Nor is any man nor beast</span>
<span style="margin-left: 3em;">That dare eat the food we eat</span>
<span style="margin-left: 3em;">Nor among us take his seat;</span>
<span style="margin-left: 3em;">For no part have I nor lot</span>
<span style="margin-left: 5em;">In the white robe and the feast.</span>
</pre>

<p class="char"><span class="smcap">Chorus.</span></p>

<pre><span style="margin-left: 3em;">For the tale I make mine own</span>
<span style="margin-left: 3em;">Is of houses overthrown,</span>
<span style="margin-left: 3em;">When the Foe within the Dwelling</span>
<span style="margin-left: 5em;">Slays a brother and is flown:</span>
<span style="margin-left: 3em;">Up and after him, Io!</span><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_18" id="Page_18">[Pg 18&nbsp;&nbsp;vv. 357-375]</a></span>
<span style="margin-left: 3em;">While the blood is still a-flow,</span>
<span style="margin-left: 3em;">Though his strength be full and swelling,</span>
<span style="margin-left: 5em;">We shall waste him, flesh from bone!</span>
</pre>

<p class="char"><span class="smcap">Other Furies.</span></p>

<pre><span style="margin-left: 3em;">Would they take thee from the care</span>
<span style="margin-left: 5em;">We have guarded thee withal?</span>
<span style="margin-left: 3em;">Would the Gods disown our prayer</span>
<span style="margin-left: 5em;">Till no Law be left at all?</span>
<span style="margin-left: 3em;">Yea, because of blood that drips</span>
<span style="margin-left: 3em;">As aforetime from our lips,</span>
<span style="margin-left: 3em;">And the world's hate that we bear,</span>
<span style="margin-left: 5em;">God hath cast us from His hall!</span>
</pre>

<p class="char"><span class="smcap">Chorus.</span></p>

<pre><span style="margin-left: 3em;">I am on them as they fly,</span>
<span style="margin-left: 3em;">With a voice out of the sky,</span>
<span style="margin-left: 3em;">And my armèd heel is o'er them</span>
<span style="margin-left: 5em;">To fall crashing from on high.</span>
<span style="margin-left: 3em;">There be fliers far and fast,</span>
<span style="margin-left: 3em;">But I trip them at the last,</span>
<span style="margin-left: 3em;">And my arms are there before them,</span>
<span style="margin-left: 5em;">And shall crush them ere they die!</span>
</pre>

<p class="char"><i>Divers</i> <span class="smcap">Furies</span>.</p>

<pre>—The glories of Man that were proud where the sunlight came,
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">Below in the dark are wasted and cast to shame;</span>
<span style="margin-left: 3em;">For he trembles at the hearing</span>
<span style="margin-left: 3em;">Of the Black Garments nearing,</span>
<span style="margin-left: 2em;">And the beating of the feet, like flame</span>

—He falls and knows not; the blow hath made blind his eyes;<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_19" id="Page_19">[Pg 19&nbsp;&nbsp;vv. 376-396]</a></span>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">And above hangs Sin, as a darkening of the skies,</span>
<span style="margin-left: 3em;">And a great voice swelling</span>
<span style="margin-left: 3em;">Like a mist about his dwelling,</span>
<span style="margin-left: 2em;">And sobbing in the mist and cries.</span>

—For so it abideth: subtle are we to plan,
<span style="margin-left: 3em;">Sure to fulfil, and forget not any Sin;</span>
<span style="margin-left: 3em;">And Venerable they call us, but none can win</span>
<span style="margin-left: 4em;">Our pardon for child of man.</span>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">Unhonoured and undesired though our kingdom be,</span>
<span style="margin-left: 3em;">Where the sun is dead and no god in all the skies,</span>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">Great crags and trackless, alike for them that see,</span>
<span style="margin-left: 4em;">And them of the wasted eyes;</span>

—What mortal man but quaketh before my power,
<span style="margin-left: 3em;">And boweth in worship to hear my rule of doom,</span>
<span style="margin-left: 3em;">God-given of old, fate-woven on the ageless loom</span>
<span style="margin-left: 4em;">And ripe to the perfect hour?</span>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">To the end of all abideth mine ancient Right,</span>
<span style="margin-left: 3em;">Whose word shall be never broke nor its deed undone,</span>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">Though my seat is below the Grave, in the place where sight</span>
<span style="margin-left: 4em;">Fails and there is no Sun.</span>
</pre>

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_20" id="Page_20">[Pg 20&nbsp;&nbsp;vv. 397-420]</a></span></p>

<p class="char"><i>Enter</i> <span class="smcap">Athena</span>.</p>

<p class="char"><span class="smcap">Athena.</span></p>

<pre>Far off I heard the calling of my name,
Beside Scamander, where I took in claim
The new land which the Achaean lords and kings,
In royal spoil for many warfarings,
Gave, root and fruit for ever, as mine own
Exempted prize, to Theseus' sons alone.
Thence came I speeding, while behind me rolled
My wingless aegis, floating fold on fold.
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">But these strange visitants&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. I tremble not</span>
Beholding, yet I marvel. Who and what
Are ye? I speak to all. And who is he
Who round mine image clings so desperately?
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">But ye are like no earth-seed ever sown,</span>
No goddess-shape that Heaven hath looked upon,
Nor any semblance borne of human kind&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">Howbeit, ye have not wronged me. I were blind</span>
To right and custom did I speak you ill.
</pre>

<p class="char"><span class="smcap">Leader.</span></p>

<pre>Virgin of God most high, have all thy will.
Still-weeping Night knows us the brood she bears;
The wronged ones in the darkness call us Prayers.
</pre>

<p class="char"><span class="smcap">Athena.</span></p>

<pre>I know your lineage and the names ye hold.
</pre>

<p class="char"><span class="smcap">Leader.</span></p>

<pre>Our office and our lot can soon be told.
</pre>

<p class="char"><span class="smcap">Athena.</span></p>

<pre>Make clear thy word, that all be understood.
</pre>

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_21" id="Page_21">[Pg 21&nbsp;&nbsp;vv. 421-430]</a></span></p>

<p class="char"><span class="smcap">Leader.</span></p>

<pre>We hunt from home the shedder of man's blood.
</pre>

<p class="char"><span class="smcap">Athena.</span></p>

<pre>What end appoint ye to that flight of his?
</pre>

<p class="char"><span class="smcap">Leader.</span></p>

<pre>A land where none remembereth what joy is.
</pre>

<p class="char"><span class="smcap">Athena.</span></p>

<pre>And such a chase on this man thou wilt cry?
</pre>

<p class="char"><span class="smcap">Leader.</span></p>

<pre>Who dared to be his mother's murderer, aye,
</pre>

<p class="char"><span class="smcap">Athena.</span></p>

<pre>What goaded him? Some fear, some unseen wrath?
</pre>

<p class="char"><span class="smcap">Leader.</span></p>

<pre>What goad could drive a man on such a path?
</pre>

<p class="char"><span class="smcap">Athena</span>&nbsp;&nbsp; (<i>looking at</i> <span class="smcap">Orestes</span>).</p>

<pre>Why speaketh one alone, when two are there?
</pre>

<p class="char"><span class="smcap">Leader.</span></p>

<pre>He will not swear, nor challenge me to swear.
</pre>

<p class="char"><span class="smcap">Athena.</span></p>

<pre>Which wouldst thou, to seem righteous, or to be?
</pre>

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_22" id="Page_22">[Pg 22&nbsp;&nbsp;vv. 431-448]</a></span></p>

<p class="char"><span class="smcap">Leader.</span></p>

<pre>What meanst thou there? Speak out thy subtlety.
</pre>

<p class="char"><span class="smcap">Athena.</span></p>

<pre>Let no bare oath the deeper right subdue.
</pre>

<p class="char"><span class="smcap">Leader.</span></p>

<pre>Try thou the cause, then, and give judgement true.
</pre>

<p class="char"><span class="smcap">Athena.</span></p>

<pre>Ye trust me this whole issue to decide?
</pre>

<p class="char"><span class="smcap">Leader.</span></p>

<pre>Who would not trust thee? True thou art and tried.
</pre>

<p class="char"><span class="smcap">Athena</span>&nbsp;&nbsp; (<i>turning to</i> <span class="smcap">Orestes</span>).</p>

<pre>Strange man, and what in turn hast thou to advance?
Thy land and lineage, and thy long mischance
Show first, then make thine answer to their laws.
If truly in the justice of thy cause
Trusting, thou clingest here in need so dire
To mine own shape, hard by my deathless fire,
In fearful prayer, as lost Ixîon prayed,
Make to all these thine answer unafraid.
</pre>

<p class="char"><span class="smcap">Orestes.</span></p>

<pre>Most high Athena, let me from the last
Of these thy questionings one fear outcast.
Pollution is not in me, nor with hand
Blood-reeking cleave I to thine altar-strand;
In sign whereof, behold, I have cast away
That silence which the man of blood alway
Observeth, till some hand, that hath the power<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_23" id="Page_23">[Pg 23&nbsp;&nbsp;vv. 449-474]</a></span>
To cleanse the sins of man, new blood shall shower
Of swine upon him, drowning the old stain.
I have been cleansed again and yet again
In others' dwellings, both by blood that fell
And running rivers that have washed me well.
Be that care then forgot. My name and birth
Are quickly told. I am sprung of Argive earth;
My father's name was known upon thy lips,
Agamemnon, marshal of a thousand ships,
With whom thou madest Troy, that city of pride,
No more a city. He returning died,
Not kingly. 'Twas my mother black of heart
Met him and murdered, snaring him with art
Of spangled webs.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Alas, that robe of wrath,
That cried to heaven the blood-stain of the bath!
Then came long exile; then, returning, I
Struck dead my mother. Nought will I deny;
So, for my sire belovèd, death met death.
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">And Loxias in these doings meriteth</span>
His portion, who foretold strange agonies
To spur me if I left unsmitten these
That slew him.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Take me thou, and judge if ill
I wrought or righteously. I will be still
And praise thy judgement, whatsoe'er betide.
</pre>

<p class="char"><span class="smcap">Athena.</span></p>

<pre>This is a mystery graver to decide
Than mortal dreameth. Nor for me 'twere good
To sift the passionate punishments of blood.
Since thou hast cast thee on my altar stair
Perfect by suffering, from thy stains that were
Made clean and harmless, suppliant at my knee,<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_24" id="Page_24">[Pg 24&nbsp;&nbsp;vv. 475-492]</a></span>
I, in my City's name, must pity thee
And chide not. Yet these too, I may not slight:
They have their portion in the Orb of Right
Eternal. If they are baffled of their will,
The wrath of undone Justice shall distil
Through all the air a poison; yea, a pall
Intolerable about the land shall fall
And groaning sickness. Doubtful thus it lies:
To cast them out or keep them in mine eyes
Were equal peril, and I must ponder sore.
Yet, seeing fate lays this matter at my door,
Myself not judging, I will judges find
In mine own City, who will make no blind
Oath-challenge to pursuer and pursued,
But follow this new rule, by me indued
As law for ever. Proofs and witnesses
Call ye on either side, and set to these
Your oaths. Such oath helps Justice in her need.
<span style="margin-left: 2em;">I will go choose the noblest of the breed</span>
Of Athens, and here bring them to decide
This bloody judgement even as truth is tried,
And then, their oath accomplished, to depart,
Right done, and no transgression in their heart.
</pre>

<p class="direct3">[<i>Exit</i> <span class="smcap">Athena</span>. <i>The Shrine is closed</i>,
<span class="smcap">Orestes</span> <i>remaining inside at the foot of
the Image</i>.</p>

<p class="char"><span class="smcap">Furies.</span></p>

<pre>—This day there is a new Order born.
<span style="margin-left: 3em;">If this long coil of judging and of strife</span>
<span style="margin-left: 3em;">Shall uplift the mother-murderer to life,</span>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">Shall the World not mark it, and in scorn</span><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_25" id="Page_25">[Pg 25&nbsp;&nbsp;vv. 493-525]</a></span>
<span style="margin-left: 3em;">Go forth to do evil with a smile?</span>
<span style="margin-left: 3em;">Yea, for parents hereafter there is guile</span>
<span style="margin-left: 4em;">That waiteth, and great anguish; by a knife</span>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">In a child's hand their bosom shall be torn.</span>

—No wrath shall be stirred by any deed,
<span style="margin-left: 3em;">No doom from the Dark Watchers any more.</span>
<span style="margin-left: 3em;">Lo, to all death I cast wide the door!</span>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">And men, while they whisper of the need</span>
<span style="margin-left: 2em;">Of their neighbour, shall pray tremblingly within</span>
<span style="margin-left: 2em;">For some rest and diminishing of sin.</span>
<span style="margin-left: 3em;">They will praise the old medicine that of yore</span>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">Brought comfort, and marvel as they bleed.</span>

—Vainly will they make their moan?
<span style="margin-left: 2em;">Vainly cry in sore despite,</span>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">"Help, ye Watchers on your throne,</span>
<span style="margin-left: 4em;">Help, O Right!"</span>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">Many a father so shall cry,</span>
<span style="margin-left: 2em;">Many a mother, new in pain;</span>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">Their vain sobbing floateth by:</span>
<span style="margin-left: 2em;">"The great House is fallen again!</span>
<span style="margin-left: 4em;">Law shall die!"</span>

—Times there be when Fear is good,
<span style="margin-left: 2em;">And the Watcher in the breast</span>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">Needs must reign in masterhood.</span>
<span style="margin-left: 4em;">Aye, tis best</span>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">Through much straitening to be wise.</span>
<span style="margin-left: 2em;">Who that hath no fear at all</span>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">In the sunlight of his eyes,</span>
<span style="margin-left: 2em;">Man or City, but shall fall</span>
<span style="margin-left: 4em;">From Right somewise?</span>

—The life that walketh without rule,<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_26" id="Page_26">[Pg 26&nbsp;&nbsp;vv. 526-554]</a></span>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">The life that is a tyrant's fool,</span>
<span style="margin-left: 4em;">Thou shalt not praise.</span>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">O'er all man's striving variously</span>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">God looketh, but, where'er it be,</span>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">Gives to the Mean his victory.</span>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">And therefore know I and confess,</span>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">The doomèd child of Godlessness</span>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">Is Pride of Man, and Pride's excess;</span>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">Only from health of heart shall spring</span>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">What men desire, what poets sing,</span>
<span style="margin-left: 4em;">Stormless days.</span>

—Whate'er befall, the Throne of Right
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">Fear thou, and let no lucre bright</span>
<span style="margin-left: 4em;">Seen suddenly,</span>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">To spurn that Altar make thee blind;</span>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">For chastisement is hid behind,</span>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">And the End waiteth, and shall bind.</span>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">Wherefore I charge thee, through all stress</span>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">Thy mother and thy father bless:</span>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">Herein, O Man, lies holiness.</span>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">And next, of all within thy fold,</span>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">The stranger and the friendless hold</span>
<span style="margin-left: 4em;">In sanctity.</span>

—He that is righteous uncompelled and free
<span style="margin-left: 4em;">His life's way taketh</span>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">Not without happiness; and utterly</span>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">Cast to destruction shall he never be.</span>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">But he who laugheth and is bold in sin,</span>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">From every port great gain he gathers in,</span>
Rejoicing; but methinks shall cast away<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_27" id="Page_27">[Pg 27&nbsp;&nbsp;vv. 555-573]</a></span>
All, with much haste and trembling, on the day
<span style="margin-left: 2em;">When sails are stript by the edge of wind and sea</span>
<span style="margin-left: 5em;">And yard-arm breaketh.</span>

He yearns, he strives, amid the whirling sea,
<span style="margin-left: 2em;">But none shall hear;</span>
And loud his Daemon laughs, saying "This is he
Who vaunted him these things should never be!"
Who now is weeping, weak in the endless foam,
And sees the foreland where beyond is home,
But shall not pass it: on the rocks of Right
Wrecked is his life's long glory; and the night
<span style="margin-left: 2em;">Falls, and there lives from all his agony</span>
<span style="margin-left: 5em;">No word nor tear.</span>
</pre>

<p class="direct1"><i>The scene is now set with seats for the Council of
the Areopagus. Enter</i> <span class="smcap">Athena</span>, <i>the</i> <span class="smcap">Judges</span>,
<i>a</i> <span class="smcap">Herald</span>, <i>a crowd of</i> <span class="smcap">Citizens</span>, <i>the</i> <span class="smcap">Furies</span>,
<span class="smcap">Orestes</span>.</p>

<p class="char"><span class="smcap">Athena.</span></p>

<pre>Herald, thine office! See that yonder crowds
Hold back, and let this piercer of the clouds,
Filled with man's breath, the Tuscan trumpet, blow
His fiery summons to the host below.
Then all be silence, while the people fill
This Council Hall. Thus shall my sovran will
And ordinance to this people, great and small,
Be known for ever, and upheld by all
Within our gates; and thus my wardens do
Justice this day, discerning false from true.
</pre>

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_28" id="Page_28">[Pg 28&nbsp;&nbsp;vv. 574-588]</a></span></p>

<p class="char"><i>Enter</i> <span class="smcap">Apollo</span>.</p>

<p class="char"><span class="smcap">Leader.</span></p>

<pre>Apollo, thou! Go, reign where thou art king!
What portion hast thou in this doom-saying?
</pre>

<p class="char"><span class="smcap">Apollo.</span></p>

<pre>I come to bear my witness. This is one
Who in great anguish came to me alone
For refuge, and knelt suppliant at my shrine.
Therefore the cleansing of his stain is mine.
Likewise I share his plea, and on me take
What guilt he bears for that dead mother's sake.
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">Ope thou the court, O Pallas, and, as well</span>
Thou canst, establish justice durable.
</pre>

<p class="char"><span class="smcap">Athena.</span></p>

<pre>Ho! Opened is the Court; and yours the speech.
<span style="margin-left: 1.5em;">(<i>To the</i> <span class="smcap">Furies</span>)</span>
He who pursueth, speaking first, can teach
Best his whole grief, and how the evil grew.
</pre>

<p class="char"><span class="smcap">Leader.</span></p>

<pre>Many are we, yet shall our words be few.
Make answer thou, point against point. And say
First this one thing: thy mother didst thou slay?
</pre>

<p class="char"><span class="smcap">Orestes.</span></p>

<pre>I slew her.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Aye. Denied it cannot be.
</pre>

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_29" id="Page_29">[Pg 29&nbsp;&nbsp;vv. 589-598]</a></span></p>

<p class="char"><span class="smcap">Leader.</span></p>

<pre>Aha! The first of the three bouts to me!
</pre>

<p class="char"><span class="smcap">Orestes.</span></p>

<pre>Too soon ye vaunt. I am not yet outsped.
</pre>

<p class="char"><span class="smcap">Leader.</span></p>

<pre>How didst thou slay? That also must be said.
</pre>

<p class="char"><span class="smcap">Orestes</span>&nbsp;&nbsp; (<i>with an effort</i>).</p>

<pre>I will say it. I drew sword and clave her throat.
</pre>

<p class="char"><span class="smcap">Leader.</span></p>

<pre>Who and what tempted thee? Who laid the plot?
</pre>

<p class="char"><span class="smcap">Orestes.</span></p>

<pre>He who is with me now, and witnesseth.
</pre>

<p class="char"><span class="smcap">Leader.</span></p>

<pre>God's prophet bade thee plot thy mother's death?
</pre>

<p class="char"><span class="smcap">Orestes.</span></p>

<pre>Yes: and hath never failed me to this day.
</pre>

<p class="char"><span class="smcap">Leader.</span></p>

<pre>And when the vote is cast, what wilt thou say?
</pre>

<p class="char"><span class="smcap">Orestes.</span></p>

<pre>I fear not. Helpers from my father's grave.
</pre>

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_30" id="Page_30">[Pg 30&nbsp;&nbsp;vv. 599-608]</a></span></p>

<p class="char"><span class="smcap">Leader.</span></p>

<pre>Go, mother-murderer! Call the dead to save!
</pre>

<p class="char"><span class="smcap">Orestes.</span></p>

<pre>Two stains of death lay mingled on her hand.
</pre>

<p class="char"><span class="smcap">Leader.</span></p>

<pre>How two? Let these who judge thee understand.
</pre>

<p class="char"><span class="smcap">Orestes.</span></p>

<pre>A husband and a father, both, she slew.
</pre>

<p class="char"><span class="smcap">Leader.</span></p>

<pre>And death hath purged her. Shalt not thou die too?
</pre>

<p class="char"><span class="smcap">Orestes.</span></p>

<pre>Ye never hunted her, for all her stain.
</pre>

<p class="char"><span class="smcap">Leader.</span></p>

<pre>'Twas not one blood in slayer and in slain.
</pre>

<p class="char"><span class="smcap">Orestes.</span></p>

<pre>And are my mother's blood and my blood one?
</pre>

<p class="char"><span class="smcap">Leader.</span></p>

<pre>How did she feed thee else beneath her zone?
Caitiff! Thy mother's blood wilt thou deny?
</pre>

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_31" id="Page_31">[Pg 31&nbsp;&nbsp;vv. 609-628]</a></span></p>

<p class="char"><span class="smcap">Orestes</span>&nbsp;&nbsp; (<i>overcome</i>).</p>

<pre>I can no more.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Give witness, and reply,
Lord Phoebus, in my stead, if righteously
I slew.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. I slew: denied it cannot be:
But rightly, or most foully—as thine own
Heart speaks, give judgement, and let all be known.
</pre>

<p class="char"><span class="smcap">Apollo.</span></p>

<pre>Ye judges of Athena's Court most high,
I come to speak before you faithfully,
Being God's prophet: therefore truth is mine.
Nor ever spake I from my throne divine
Of man nor woman, land nor city wall,
Save by command of Him who ruleth all,
Zeus, the Olympian Father. Is there Right
Holier than this, I charge ye think, or Might
More mighty? Follow ye the All-father's will:
If oaths be strong, is Zeus not stronger still?
</pre>

<p class="char"><span class="smcap">Leader.</span></p>

<pre>'Twas Zeus, thou tellest, laid this duty large
Upon thy lips? 'Twas Zeus who bade thee charge
This man to avenge his father and cast down,
As nothing worth, his mother's sacred crown?
</pre>

<p class="char"><span class="smcap">Apollo.</span></p>

<pre>Are these the same? That a great man, raised high
By royal sceptre, given of God, should die,
And die by a woman's hand—and not in war
By Amazonian arrow, sped from far,&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.
But—Hear my tale, O Pallas, and ye too<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_32" id="Page_32">[Pg 32&nbsp;&nbsp;vv. 629-651]</a></span>
Who sit enthronèd to sift false from true;
He came from battle after sufferings sore
But greater glories, and she stood before
The gate to greet and praise him, strewed his path
With crimson robes and led him to his bath—
A marble bed!—and o'er the end thereof
Laid the great web and curtained it above,
To ensnare him as he rose; then, in the wide
Unending folds, she smote him and he died!
So died a man, ye hear it from my lips,
All-honoured, War-Lord of a thousand ships;
And such a wife was she! Be stern, and smite
The guilty, ye who sit to establish right!
</pre>

<p class="char"><span class="smcap">Leader.</span></p>

<pre>Doth Zeus count fatherhood so high a thing?
Who cast in bonds his father and his king,
Old Cronos? Are these things not contrary?
I charge ye, judges, hearken his reply.
</pre>

<p class="char"><span class="smcap">Apollo.</span></p>

<pre>Ye worms of hate, O ye that Gods abhor,
Bonds can be loosened; there is cure therefor,
And many and many a plan in God's great mind
To free the prisoners whom he erst did bind.
But once the dust hath drunk the blood of men
Murdered, there is no gathering it again.
For that no magic doth my Father know,
Though all things else he changeth high and low
Or fixeth, and no toil is in his breath.
</pre>

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_33" id="Page_33">[Pg 33&nbsp;&nbsp;vv. 652-673]</a></span></p>

<p class="char"><span class="smcap">Leader.</span></p>

<pre>Is that thy pleading against this man's death?
The kindred blood, his mother's blood, the well
Of his own life, he hath spilt. How shall he dwell
In Argos? In his home? What altar-stair,
When Argos worships, will receive his prayer?
What love-bowl of the brethren cleanse his hand?
</pre>

<p class="char"><span class="smcap">Apollo.</span></p>

<pre>That too I answer; mark and understand.
The mother to the child that men call hers
Is no true life-begetter, but a nurse
Of live seed. 'Tis the sower of the seed
Alone begetteth. Woman comes at need,
A stranger, to hold safe in trust and love
That bud of new life—save when God above
Wills that it die. And would ye proof of this,
There have been fathers where no mother is.
Whereof a perfect witness standeth nigh,
Athena Pallas, child of the Most High,
A thought-begotten unconceivèd bloom,
No nursling of the darkness of the womb,
But such a flower of life as goddess ne'er
Hath born in heaven nor ever more shall bear.
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">Pallas, in all things it is mine to swell</span>
In power thy people and thy citadel;
And therefore to thine Altar did I send
This suppliant, that hereafter to the end
Of mortal time he may be true to thee,
And plant his spear by thine unfalteringly,
And on through generations yet unborn
Argos observe the pact her King hath sworn.
</pre>

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_34" id="Page_34">[Pg 34&nbsp;&nbsp;vv. 674-691]</a></span></p>

<p class="char"><span class="smcap">Athena.</span></p>

<pre>Now shall I charge upon their faith these men
To cast true stones, or would ye speak again?
</pre>

<p class="char"><span class="smcap">Leader.</span></p>

<pre>Shot is our every arrow: I but stay
To learn how ends the issue of the day.
</pre>

<p class="char"><span class="smcap">Athena.</span></p>

<pre>How shall I cast a judgement in this cause
Unblamed of you, and of the eternal laws?
</pre>

<p class="char"><span class="smcap">Apollo.</span></p>

<pre>Ye have heard what ye have heard. Strangers, revere
Your oaths, and cast your judgement without fear.
</pre>

<p class="char"><span class="smcap">Athena.</span></p>

<pre>Hear now mine ordinance, ye who have striven
This day to give, what none before hath given,
True judgement o'er spilt blood. O Attic Folk,
Henceforth for ever, under Aigeus' yoke,
This Council and this Judgement Seat by me
Are stablisht. On this mountain shall it be,
Here in the Amazons' most virgin hold,
Who came in wrath for Theseus' wrongs of old
Embattled, and this fortress against ours,
Hill against hill, towers against soaring towers,
Built, and to Ares on the rock with flame
Gave sacrifice: whence comes its awful name,
The Rock, the Mount, of Ares. All things here
Being holy, Reverence and her sister, Fear,
In darkness as in daylight shall restrain<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_35" id="Page_35">[Pg 35&nbsp;&nbsp;vv. 692-714]</a></span>
From all unrighteousness the sons of men,
While Athens' self corrupt not her own law.
With mire and evil influx ye can flaw
Fair water till no lips may drink thereof.
I charge you, citizens, enfold and love
That spirit that nor anarch is nor thrall;
And casting away Fear, yet cast not all;
For who that hath no fear is safe from sin?
That Fear which is both Ruth and Law within
Be yours, and round your city and your land
Shall be upraised a rampart, yea, a hand
Of strong deliverance, which no sons of men,
From the Isle of Pelops to the Scythian fen,
Possess nor know, this Council of the Right,
Untouched of lucre, terrible to smite,
And swift and merciful, a guard to keep
Vigil above my people while they sleep.
Which here I establish. Let these words advise
My city evermore.—I charge you, rise
And lift your stones of doom and judge, alway
Your oath remembering. I have said my say.
</pre>

<p class="direct3">[<i>The</i> <span class="smcap">Judges</span> <i>rise and go one by one past the
two urns, casting their stones as they pass</i>.</p>

<p class="char"><span class="smcap">Leader.</span></p>

<pre>Behold, an awful presence moveth yet
Within your land, which mock not nor forget!
</pre>

<p class="char"><span class="smcap">Apollo.</span></p>

<pre>The will of Zeus, by my lips ministered,
I charge you make not fruitless nor unfeared!
</pre>

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_36" id="Page_36">[Pg 36&nbsp;&nbsp;vv. 715-730]</a></span></p>

<p class="char"><span class="smcap">Leader.</span></p>

<pre>And what wouldst thou with blood, having therein
No place? Henceforth thine altars are unclean!
</pre>

<p class="char"><span class="smcap">Apollo.</span></p>

<pre>Did Zeus, then, sin, who bowed his head to spare
Blood-red Ixîon for his burning prayer?
</pre>

<p class="char"><span class="smcap">Leader.</span></p>

<pre>Thou speakest: but my Law, if it be broke,
Shall come again in wrath to haunt this folk.
</pre>

<p class="char"><span class="smcap">Apollo.</span></p>

<pre>Thou hast no honour more 'mid things divine,
Or old or new: the victory shall be mine.
</pre>

<p class="char"><span class="smcap">Leader.</span></p>

<pre>So in Admêtus' House thou didst betray
The Fates, to make man deathless past his day.
</pre>

<p class="char"><span class="smcap">Apollo.</span></p>

<pre>Shall not a god regard his worshipper
Then chiefliest, when in peril and in prayer?
</pre>

<p class="char"><span class="smcap">Leader.</span></p>

<pre>The ancient boundaries thou didst desecrate,
Thou mad'st a drunkard of Eternal Fate!
</pre>

<p class="char"><span class="smcap">Apollo.</span></p>

<pre>True Justice thou canst know not. Thou shalt spue
Thy venom forth, and none give heed thereto.
</pre>

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_37" id="Page_37">[Pg 37&nbsp;&nbsp;vv. 731-747]</a></span></p>

<p class="char"><span class="smcap">Leader.</span></p>

<pre>Women are we, and old; and thou dost ride
Above us, trampling, in thy youth and pride.
Howbeit, I wait to know the end, being still
In doubt to work this City good or ill.
</pre>

<p class="char"><span class="smcap">Athena.</span></p>

<pre>One judgement still remains. I, at the last,
To set Orestes free this stone will cast:
For, lo, no mother bare me: I approve
In all—save only that I know not love—
The man's way. Flesh and spirit I am His
Who gave me life. And in this coil it is
No dire deed that a woman, who had slain
Her mate and house-lord, should be quelled again.
Wherefore I judge that here, if equal be
The votes ye cast, Orestes shall go free.
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">Ye judges, haste: on you this office turns:</span>
And cast the gathered sea-stones from the urns.
</pre>

<p class="char"><span class="smcap">Orestes.</span></p>

<pre>Apollo, Lord, what shall the issue be?
</pre>

<p class="char"><span class="smcap">Leader.</span></p>

<pre>O Night, O dark-eyed Mother, dost thou see?
</pre>

<p class="char"><span class="smcap">Orestes.</span></p>

<pre>Is it the noose of death, or life and light?
</pre>

<p class="char"><span class="smcap">Leader.</span></p>

<pre>My law down-trodden or enthroned in right?
</pre>

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_38" id="Page_38">[Pg 38&nbsp;&nbsp;vv. 748-771]</a></span></p>

<p class="char"><span class="smcap">Apollo.</span></p>

<pre>Divide the fallen sea-stones as is due,
Strangers, and in the count see all be true.
An absent voice hath made life ruinous,
And one cast pebble built a fallen house.
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">[<i>The scrutineers bring their results to</i> <span class="smcap">Athena</span></span>
</pre>

<p class="char"><span class="smcap">Athena.</span></p>

<pre>This prisoner, since the stones for ill and good
Are equal, hath escaped the doom of blood.
</pre>

<p class="char"><span class="smcap">Orestes.</span></p>

<pre>O Pallas, O deliverer of my race,
Thou hast led back the wanderer to his place,
The homeless to his home; and men shall say
"Once more he is an Argive, and this day
Dwells in his father's riches, by the word
Of Pallas, Loxias, and Zeus the Third,
Who saveth all and all accomplisheth."
'Twas He of old who saw my father's death,
And pitied; He who saw pursuing me
My mother's ministers, and set me free.
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">Pallas, to this thy people and thy clime</span>
Through all the long years of ensuing Time
I swear, ere I depart to mine own land,
This oath. No captain of an Argive band
Shall ever against Athens raise his spear.
Yea, and if any break this law, I swear
Myself out of the grave bewilderment
Shall set before their host, and discontent,
Disheartened roads and rivers evil-starred,
Till back they turn, bowed down by toils too hard
For bearing. But if still with vow unbroke,<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_39" id="Page_39">[Pg 39&nbsp;&nbsp;vv. 772-795]</a></span>
Through storm or shine, for Pallas and her folk
Their lance is lifted, then to Argos too
My love shall be the greater, and hold true.
And fare thee well, O Pallas; fare you well,
All that within her ancient rampart dwell;
Iron may your grasp against all evil be,
And strong to save, and big with victory!
<span style="margin-left: 14.5em;">[<i>Exit</i> <span class="smcap">Orestes</span>.</span>
</pre>

<p class="char"><span class="smcap">Furies.</span></p>

<pre><span style="margin-left: 2em;">Woe on you, woe, ye younger gods!</span>
<span style="margin-left: 4em;">Ye have trampled the great Laws of old</span>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">Beneath your chariots! Ye have broke the rods</span>
<span style="margin-left: 3em;">Of justice, yea and torn them from my hold!</span>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">Mine office gone, unhappy and angered sore,</span>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">I rage alone. What have I any more</span>
<span style="margin-left: 2em;">To do? Or be? Shall not mine injury turn</span>
<span style="margin-left: 3em;">And crush this people? Shall not poison rain</span>
<span style="margin-left: 3em;">Upon them, even the poison of this pain</span>
<span style="margin-left: 5em;">Wherewith my heart doth burn?</span>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">And up therefrom there shall a lichen creep,</span>
<span style="margin-left: 5em;">A leafless, childless, blight,</span>
A stain in the earth man-slaying.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. O just
<span style="margin-left: 2em;">Throne of Right!</span>
<span style="margin-left: 5em;">Have ye not suffered deep,</span>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">Deep, ye unhappy children of old Night,</span>
<span style="margin-left: 5em;">Born to be scorned and weep!</span>
</pre>

<p class="char"><span class="smcap">Athena.</span></p>

<pre>I pray you, nay! Make not this bitter moan;
Ye are not conquered. Equal, stone for stone,
The judgement fell, in honesty of thought,<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_40" id="Page_40">[Pg 40&nbsp;&nbsp;vv. 796-822]</a></span>
Not scorn of thee. From Zeus on high was brought
A shining witness; and the god, who gave
The word to slay, himself was here to save,
Lest this man for obedience to his will
Should perish.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. And for this ye fain would spill
Your poison? Ah, take thought! Nor on our heads
Rain the strange dew a spirit's anger sheds,
Seed-ravening blight and mildews merciless,
Till all the land lie waste in fruitlessness.
Spare us, and, lo, I promise: here shall be
A home your own, a caverned mystery,
Where alway ye shall sit, enthroned in pride
And shining, by my people glorified.
</pre>

<p class="char"><span class="smcap">Furies.</span></p>

<pre><span style="margin-left: 2em;">Woe on you, woe, ye younger gods!</span>
<span style="margin-left: 4em;">Ye have trampled the great Laws of old</span>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">Beneath your chariots! Ye have broke the rods</span>
<span style="margin-left: 3em;">Of justice, yea and torn them from my hold!</span>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">Mine office gone, unhappy and angered sore,</span>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">I rage alone. What have I any more</span>
<span style="margin-left: 2em;">To do? Or be? Shall not mine injury turn</span>
<span style="margin-left: 3em;">And crush this people? Shall not poison rain</span>
<span style="margin-left: 3em;">Upon them, even the poison of this pain</span>
<span style="margin-left: 5em;">Wherewith my heart doth burn?</span>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">And up therefrom there shall a lichen creep,</span>
<span style="margin-left: 5em;">A leafless, childless, blight,</span>
A stain in the earth man-slaying.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. O just
<span style="margin-left: 2em;">Throne of Right!</span>
<span style="margin-left: 5em;">Have ye not suffered deep,</span>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">Deep, ye unhappy children of old Night,</span>
<span style="margin-left: 5em;">Born to be scorned and weep!</span>
</pre>

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_41" id="Page_41">[Pg 41&nbsp;&nbsp;vv. 823-846]</a></span></p>

<p class="char"><span class="smcap">Athena.</span></p>

<pre>Ah, rage not. No dishonour comes you nigh;
Nor, being immortal, blast for these who die
Their little life and land. I, even as you,
Obey the supreme Father, yea, I too.
What boots it to say more? To me alone
The keys of that great treasure-house are known
Where sleep the lightnings.—But He needs them not!
Accept my word, and cast not here the hot
Fruits of a passion that turns all to ill:
Bid the dark tempest's bitter surge be still,
Thou great in glory, partner of my home!
From many miles of land to thee shall come
First-fruits for maidens wed, for children born;
Then shall ye bless this peace that we have sworn.
</pre>

<p class="char"><span class="smcap">Furies.</span></p>

<pre><span style="margin-left: 3em;">That this should fall on me,</span>
<span style="margin-left: 5em;">Me of the ancient way,</span>
<span style="margin-left: 3em;">The faithful of heart! To be</span>
<span style="margin-left: 3em;">Unclean, abominable,</span>
<span style="margin-left: 3em;">In the darkness where I dwell,</span>
<span style="margin-left: 5em;">And mine honour shorn away!</span>
My breath is as a fire flung far and wide,
And a strange anguish stabbeth at my side.
Hear thou my wrath, O Mother, Night, mine own,
Hear what these young false-handed gods have wrought!
Mine immemorial honour is overthrown,
<span style="margin-left: 5em;">And I am naught!</span>
</pre>

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_42" id="Page_42">[Pg 42&nbsp;&nbsp;vv. 847-880]</a></span></p>

<p class="char"><span class="smcap">Athena.</span></p>

<pre>Thine heaviness myself will help thee bear.
Older thou art than I, and surely ware
Of wisdom that I wot not: yet also
To me Zeus giveth both to think and know.
And if ye leave us for the stranger's shore,
This know I, that your heart shall still be sore
For Athens. Time's great river in its flow
From darkness shall but make her glory grow.
And here in honour at Erechtheus' side
Enthronèd, thou shalt garner gifts of pride
From men and women worshippers, in fair
Procession moving, richer and more rare
Than eye of man hath seen in other lands.
Such offering now awaits thee at my hands:
Blessing and blest, 'mid glories gladly given,
To share this land, the best beloved of Heaven.
</pre>

<p class="char"><span class="smcap">Furies.</span></p>

<pre><span style="margin-left: 3em;">That this should fall on me,</span>
<span style="margin-left: 5em;">Me of the ancient way,</span>
<span style="margin-left: 3em;">The faithful of heart! To be</span>
<span style="margin-left: 3em;">Unclean, abominable,</span>
<span style="margin-left: 3em;">In the darkness where I dwell,</span>
<span style="margin-left: 5em;">And mine honour shorn away!</span>
My breath is as a fire flung far and wide,
And a strange anguish stabbeth at my side.
Hear thou my wrath, O Mother, Night, mine own,
Hear what these young false-handed gods have wrought!
Mine immemorial honour is overthrown,
<span style="margin-left: 5em;">And I am naught!</span>
</pre>

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_43" id="Page_43">[Pg 43&nbsp;&nbsp;vv. 881-896]</a></span></p>

<p class="char"><span class="smcap">Athena.</span></p>

<pre>I will not cease thine anger to assuage
With good words. None shall say that, in thine age,
By younger gods and city-building men
Thou and thy law were mocked, cast out again
To walk the wilderness, exiles from hence.
If thou canst hold that spirit in reverence
Which hears Persuasion and which thinks again,
Whose understanding and whose peace doth reign
By God's appointment in my word and thought,
Here thou wilt stay. Or, if that please thee not,
Thou shalt not justly lay upon this land
Or wrath, or vengeance, or afflicting hand.
Stay, if ye will. Let this soil be your own
With Right made perfect and an ageless throne.
</pre>

<p class="char"><span class="smcap">Leader.</span></p>

<pre>Great Pallas, what abode shall be my lot?
</pre>

<p class="char"><span class="smcap">Athena.</span></p>

<pre>A throne unwashed by tears; reject it not.
</pre>

<p class="char"><span class="smcap">Leader.</span></p>

<pre>Say I consent; what shall mine office be?
</pre>

<p class="char"><span class="smcap">Athena.</span></p>

<pre>No house shall prosper save by aid of thee.
</pre>

<p class="char"><span class="smcap">Leader.</span></p>

<pre>Such greatness mine! Wilt thou thereof have care?
</pre>

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_44" id="Page_44">[Pg 44&nbsp;&nbsp;vv. 897-910]</a></span></p>

<p class="char"><span class="smcap">Athena.</span></p>

<pre>Yea; and through life uphold thy worshipper.
</pre>

<p class="char"><span class="smcap">Leader.</span></p>

<pre>For dateless time thou giv'st me warranty?
</pre>

<p class="char"><span class="smcap">Athena.</span></p>

<pre>How should I speak the thing that shall not be?
</pre>

<p class="char"><span class="smcap">Leader.</span></p>

<pre>Thou wilt soften me.&nbsp;. .&nbsp;. Methinks mine anger bends.
</pre>

<p class="char"><span class="smcap">Athena.</span></p>

<pre>Stay, and that softened mood will find thee friends.
</pre>

<p class="char"><span class="smcap">Leader.</span></p>

<pre>What spell upon the land wouldst have me lay?
</pre>

<p class="char"><span class="smcap">Athena.</span></p>

<pre>All that brings Victory and not Dismay.
From earth and dewy sea—be this thy prayer—
From moving winds and the still dome of air
Let breaths of gladness and sweet sunlight come;
The fruit of flocks and fields round every home
Abundant flow and, year by year, be true.
The seeds of human life make fruitful, too,
Save in the ungodly: them thy Rule of Right
Shall uproot, as of old. For I delight,
Like one that tends his garden, to uprear<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_45" id="Page_45">[Pg 45&nbsp;&nbsp;vv. 911-926]</a></span>
These plants of righteousness, untouched by fear
Of evil. Cast not on this soil of mine
Thy whet-stones of the blood, like poisonous wine
In young men's hearts, till rage and death be stirred.
Oh, take not from the fierce mate-murdering bird
The heart to give my people, the blind war
Within, that burneth most where brethren are.
War with the stranger, yes; no stint thereof;
Terror is there, and glory, and great love;
But not the mad bird-rage that slays at home.
Such let thine office be. And if there come
True-hearted war, I will not fail to uphold
This land victorious where great deeds are told.
</pre>

<p class="direct3">[<i>At a sign from the</i> <span class="smcap">Leader</span>, <i>the</i> <span class="smcap">Furies</span> <i>take
formation for a Song of Blessing</i>.</p>

<p class="char"><span class="smcap">Furies.</span></p>

<pre><span style="margin-left: 2em;">A home with Pallas shall be mine.</span>
<span style="margin-left: 3em;">I will not give this City nay,</span>
<span style="margin-left: 2em;">The Fort of Heaven, which Zeus divine</span>
<span style="margin-left: 3em;">And faithful Ares hold in sway,</span>
<span style="margin-left: 2em;">A shining loveliness to enfold</span>
<span style="margin-left: 2em;">The altars of the gods of old.</span>

<span style="margin-left: 2em;">For whom—so do I weave my prayer</span>
<span style="margin-left: 3em;">And move with words of presage good—</span>
<span style="margin-left: 2em;">All fortunes whereby life is fair,</span>
<span style="margin-left: 3em;">Like springing fountains, up shall flood,</span>
<span style="margin-left: 2em;">From Earth's deep-bosomed caverns won</span>
<span style="margin-left: 2em;">By wooing of the enthronèd Sun.</span>
</pre>

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_46" id="Page_46">[Pg 46&nbsp;&nbsp;vv. 927-948]</a></span></p>

<p class="char"><span class="smcap">Athena.</span></p>

<pre><span style="margin-left: 2em;">I love my City; and with plan</span>
<span style="margin-left: 3em;">Aforethought here have welcomed these,</span>
<span style="margin-left: 3em;">The Awarders great and hard to appease,</span>
<span style="margin-left: 2em;">Whose realm is all the estate of man.</span>

<span style="margin-left: 2em;">Justice is theirs: though many an one</span>
<span style="margin-left: 3em;">May meet their wrath in innocence,</span>
<span style="margin-left: 3em;">Not knowing why the wound nor whence,</span>
<span style="margin-left: 2em;">That striketh. Some great evil done</span>

<span style="margin-left: 2em;">Aforetime, with no payment just,</span>
<span style="margin-left: 3em;">Casts him to These. Strange wrath and hate</span>
<span style="margin-left: 3em;">Are round him, and he cries: but Fate,</span>
<span style="margin-left: 2em;">Unanswering, grindeth him to dust.</span>
</pre>

<p class="char"><span class="smcap">Furies.</span></p>

<pre><span style="margin-left: 2em;">No storm-wind—so I speak my prize—</span>
<span style="margin-left: 3em;">Shall breathe the blight that poisoneth trees;</span>
<span style="margin-left: 2em;">No burning things that blind the eyes</span>
<span style="margin-left: 3em;">Of plants, shall pass her boundaries:</span>
<span style="margin-left: 2em;">The groaning pest shall come not nigh,</span>
<span style="margin-left: 2em;">Nor fruit upon the branches die.</span>

<span style="margin-left: 2em;">The flocks shall browse in happy cheer,</span>
<span style="margin-left: 3em;">And Pan, the Shepherd, guard them true,</span>
<span style="margin-left: 2em;">With twofold increase, as the year</span>
<span style="margin-left: 3em;">Repays her seeds in season due;</span>
<span style="margin-left: 2em;">And deep-hid treasures of the ground</span>
<span style="margin-left: 2em;">Shall be in God's due order found.</span>
</pre>

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_47" id="Page_47">[Pg 47&nbsp;&nbsp;vv. 949-971]</a></span></p>

<p class="char"><span class="smcap">Athena.</span></p>

<pre><span style="margin-left: 2em;">Ye Guardians, hear the word she hath said,</span>
<span style="margin-left: 3em;">And shall fulfill! Most potent hands</span>
<span style="margin-left: 3em;">Hath great Erînys, in the lands</span>
<span style="margin-left: 2em;">Where dwell the deathless and the dead.</span>

<span style="margin-left: 2em;">And all this world of men declares</span>
<span style="margin-left: 3em;">Her visible act on right and wrong;</span>
<span style="margin-left: 3em;">How one man's life she makes a song,</span>
<span style="margin-left: 2em;">Another's a long mist of tears.</span>
</pre>

<p class="char"><span class="smcap">Furies.</span></p>

<pre><span style="margin-left: 3em;">Let manhood's glory by no doom</span>
<span style="margin-left: 4em;">Of death untimely be defiled;</span>
<span style="margin-left: 3em;">Let life to maidens in their bloom</span>
<span style="margin-left: 4em;">Bring each a lover and a child.</span>
<span style="margin-left: 3em;">O whatsoever Gods have power,</span>
<span style="margin-left: 3em;">And Fates eternal, grant this dower!</span>

<span style="margin-left: 3em;">Ye Fates, our Mother's Sisterhood,</span>
<span style="margin-left: 4em;">Assigners true to all that be,</span>
<span style="margin-left: 3em;">To every house its ill and good,</span>
<span style="margin-left: 4em;">To every hour its potency;</span>
<span style="margin-left: 3em;">Righteous participants through all,</span>
<span style="margin-left: 3em;">Of Gods the most majestical.</span>
</pre>

<p class="char"><span class="smcap">Athena.</span></p>

<pre><span style="margin-left: 2em;">With joy I hear their prescient song</span>
<span style="margin-left: 3em;">Touching my land; and much in pride</span>
<span style="margin-left: 3em;">I praise Persuasion gentle-eyed,</span>
<span style="margin-left: 2em;">Who guarded well my lips and tongue,</span>

<span style="margin-left: 2em;">When these were wrathful and denied;</span><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_48" id="Page_48">[Pg 48&nbsp;&nbsp;vv. 972-995]</a></span>
<span style="margin-left: 3em;">But Zeus, whose Word is in the Mart,</span>
<span style="margin-left: 3em;">Prevailed; and of our strife no part,</span>
<span style="margin-left: 2em;">Save strife in blessing, shall abide.</span>
</pre>

<p class="char"><span class="smcap">Furies.</span></p>

<pre><span style="margin-left: 2em;">Let her who hungereth still for wrong,</span>
<span style="margin-left: 3em;">Faction, in Athens ne'er again</span>
<span style="margin-left: 2em;">Lift on the air her ravening song;</span>
<span style="margin-left: 3em;">Let not the dust of Pallas' Plain</span>
<span style="margin-left: 2em;">Drink the dark blood of any son</span>
<span style="margin-left: 2em;">By fury of revenge fordone.</span>

<span style="margin-left: 2em;">Rage not to smite the smiter, lest</span>
<span style="margin-left: 3em;">By rage the City's heart be torn:</span>
<span style="margin-left: 2em;">Bless him that blesseth: in each breast</span>
<span style="margin-left: 3em;">So shall a single love be born,</span>
<span style="margin-left: 2em;">And 'gainst Her foes a single hate.</span>
<span style="margin-left: 2em;">This also maketh firm a state.</span>
</pre>

<p class="char"><span class="smcap">Athena.</span></p>

<pre><span style="margin-left: 2em;">Wise are they and have found the way</span>
<span style="margin-left: 3em;">Of peace. And in each awful face</span>
<span style="margin-left: 3em;">I see for you, my People, grace:</span>
<span style="margin-left: 2em;">If ye are gentle, even as they,</span>

<span style="margin-left: 2em;">And do them worship, this shall be</span>
<span style="margin-left: 3em;">Your work: to guide through ill, through good,</span>
<span style="margin-left: 3em;">Both land and town in that pure mood</span>
<span style="margin-left: 2em;">Of truth that shuns iniquity.</span>
</pre>

<p class="direct3">[<i>The</i> <span class="smcap">Judges</span> <i>and the concourse of</i> <span class="smcap">Athenians</span>
<i>have now formed into procession, to
escort the</i> <span class="smcap">Furies</span> <i>to their Cavern</i>.</p>

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_49" id="Page_49">[Pg 49&nbsp;&nbsp;vv. 996-1013]</a></span></p>

<p class="char"><span class="smcap">Chorus of Athenians.</span></p>

<pre><span style="margin-left: 2em;">Rejoice, rejoice! And as ye go your ways</span>
<span style="margin-left: 2em;">In rich apportionment of blissful days,</span>
<span style="margin-left: 6em;">Farewell, farewell!</span>
</pre>

<p class="char"><span class="smcap">Furies.</span></p>

<pre><span style="margin-left: 2em;">Ye folk within the wall, approved</span>
<span style="margin-left: 3em;">To neighbour Jove's eternal eyes,</span>
<span style="margin-left: 2em;">Ye lovers of the Well-beloved,</span>
<span style="margin-left: 3em;">The Virgin Spirit, timely wise,</span>
<span style="margin-left: 2em;">The wings of Pallas fold above you,</span>
<span style="margin-left: 2em;">Therefore shall Zeus the Father love you.</span>
</pre>

<p class="char"><span class="smcap">Athena.</span></p>

<pre><span style="margin-left: 2em;">Fare ye well also. I must go</span>
<span style="margin-left: 3em;">Before you, guiding, to make bright</span>
<span style="margin-left: 3em;">Your secret chambers with the light,</span>
<span style="margin-left: 2em;">The holy light, they dared not know.</span>

<span style="margin-left: 2em;">Come, and when deep beneath the veil</span>
<span style="margin-left: 3em;">Of earth ye pass, 'mid offering high,</span>
<span style="margin-left: 3em;">Hold down the evil that shall die,</span>
<span style="margin-left: 2em;">Send up the good that shall prevail.</span>

<span style="margin-left: 2em;">Ye sons of Cranaos, guide them, till</span>
<span style="margin-left: 3em;">These Wanderers rest within your doors:</span>
<span style="margin-left: 3em;">With them one City now is yours;</span>
<span style="margin-left: 2em;">Be one in working and in will!</span>
</pre>

<p class="char"><span class="smcap">Chorus of Athenians.</span></p>

<pre><span style="margin-left: 2em;">Rejoice, rejoice! I raise my voice again,</span>
<span style="margin-left: 2em;">To speak that bliss that overtowereth pain.</span>
<span style="margin-left: 6em;">Farewell, farewell!</span>
</pre>

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_50" id="Page_50">[Pg 50&nbsp;&nbsp;vv. 1014-1039]</a></span></p>

<p class="char"><span class="smcap">Furies.</span></p>

<pre><span style="margin-left: 2em;">All things within the Wall that dwell,</span>
<span style="margin-left: 3em;">All gods and men, that are or were;</span>
<span style="margin-left: 2em;">All life from Pallas' citadel</span>
<span style="margin-left: 3em;">Which draws its being, I am here:</span>
<span style="margin-left: 2em;">These Dwellers in your gates adore,</span>
<span style="margin-left: 2em;">And fear the tides of Life no more!</span>
</pre>

<p class="char"><span class="smcap">Athena.</span></p>

<pre>The prayers they have uttered o'er my land I praise;
And speed them on, 'mid many a torch's blaze,
To that most deep and subterranean end
Of wandering. Let these ministers, who tend
Mine image, follow; righteous warders they.
Let all the fulness of the land this day,
Children, and wives and women bent with years,
Come forth: do worship to these Wanderers
Accepted in their robes of crimson dye.
Let leap the flash of fire. This great Ally
Shall be revealed and proven in the fate
Of Athens, if her men be true and great.
</pre>

<p class="char"><span class="smcap">Chorus of Athenians.</span></p>

<pre>Gather ye home; are ye great, do ye crave adoration,
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">O childless Children of Night in the pride of your going?</span>
<span style="margin-left: 2em;">(Give good words, O Folk of the Fold!)</span>
Aeonian caverns of glory are yours, and oblation
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">Of worship, and sacrifice high, and praise overflowing.</span>
<span style="margin-left: 2em;">(Give good words, O young men and old!)</span>
Come with the Law that can pardon, the Judgement that knoweth,<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_51" id="Page_51">[Pg 51&nbsp;&nbsp;vv. 1040-1047]</a></span>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">O Semnai, Semnai, watchers o'er people and land;</span>
And joy be a-stream in your ways, as the fire that bloweth
<span style="margin-left: 3em;">A-stream from beacon and brand.</span>
<span style="margin-left: 8em;">[<i>A cry of joy rises above the singing.</i></span>
</pre>

<pre>Outpour ye the Chalice of Peace where the torches are blending:
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">In Pallas the place it is found and the task it is done.</span>
The Law that is Fate and the Father the All-Comprehending
<span style="margin-left: 4em;">Are here met together as one.</span>
</pre>

<p class="direct3">[<i>Again a cry of joy as the Procession passes
out of sight.</i></p>

<p><br><br></p>

<p class="char"><span class="smcap">The End</span></p>

<p><br><br></p>
<hr style="width: 65%;">
<p><br><br></p>

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_52" id="Page_52">[Pg 52]</a></span></p>

<p class="center">NOTES</p>

<p>The Scene is conceived as different in different parts of the play, but
probably no actual change was made. A stage with the usual "House"
background, representing a Temple or Castle, with a round orchestra
(dancing floor) on a lower level in front, will suit all the needs of
the action. A statue of Athena in place of the Omphalos Altar will turn
the "House" from the Temple of Apollo at Delphi to that of Athena in
Athens. A semi-circle of seats, or something similar, will symbolize the
Areopagus. Compare the change of scene in the Choëphoroe, where
Agamemnon's Grave seems to be in the centre of the orchestra while the
"House" represents the palace of Aigisthos, and the action of the play
is now at one, now at the other.</p>

<p>P. 1, l. 1. The priestess first praises the Holders of the Throne of
prophecy at Delphi—Earth, Themis, Phoebe, Apollo; then the other divine
beings in the neighbourhood, including the River Pleistos, and ending
suitably with Zeus the Perfector or Accomplisher (<i>Teleios</i>). The
ordinary legend told of Apollo's battle with a dragon, born of Earth,
and the anger of Earth thereafter; Aeschylus insists that there was
never any strife among the gods at Delphi.</p>

<p>P. 1, l. 9. Apollo was at Delos, his rocky isle with the "orbèd mere" in
it, when he heard of the<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_53" id="Page_53">[Pg 53]</a></span> gift made to him, and set off to take
possession of Delphi.</p>

<p>P. 2, l. 19. Literally: "Loxias is the forth-shower (<i>prophêtês</i>) of
Zeus the Father": Loxias is the special title of Phoebus Apollo as
prophet: the line is important for the understanding of the play.</p>

<p>P. 2, l. 24. Bromios and Pentheus: the story is given in the <i>Bacchae</i>
of Euripides.</p>

<p>P. 3, l. 40. "Blood on his hand, etc.": as if he had come straight from
the murder. To inquire why the blood is still wet, and to explain that
it is only the blood of swine killed in purification (ll. 284, 450), is
to treat the matter too realistically.</p>

<p>P. 3, ll. 47 ff. This account prepares the audience for the appearance
of the Erînyes, who had apparently not been represented on the stage
before. They are not exactly like the Gorgons, nor yet like the winged
Harpies who swept away Phineus' food.</p>

<p>P. 3, l. 64. <span class="smcap">Stage Direction.</span> We do not know how the inner shrine was
shown, whether by wide doors or by the drawing of a curtain.</p>

<p>P. 4, l. 71. "Born for wickedness and sorrow": i.e. they exist for the
punishment of sin, and nothing else. But see Introduction, p. <a href="#Page_vi">vi</a> f.</p>

<p>P. 4, l. 79. The City of Pallas is Athens, her Rock the Acropolis.</p>

<p>P. 4, l. 90. Hermes: he is not present, but is invoked as the regular
Guide of the Wanderer. "Zeus pitieth, etc.": this is the essential
doctrine of the play.</p>

<p>P. 5, ll. 94 ff. The Ghost. The Ghost is a Dream, and vanishes as the
Furies wake. This does not mean that to an ancient poet the Ghost was
unreal, but that a Dream was real. In the Iliad<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_54" id="Page_54">[Pg 54]</a></span> (Book II, 6 ff.) the
Dream behaves like any other messenger of Zeus.</p>

<p>P. 6, l. 140. <span class="smcap">Leader of Furies.</span> Homer speaks indifferently of "the
Erînys" (singular) and "the Erînyes" (plural). Greek theology felt the
difference between singular and plural far less than we do.</p>

<p>The Furies argue that Apollo has (1) broken the Law by stealing his
favourite away from justice, and (2) defiled his own altar by bringing
thither a man polluted with blood.</p>

<p>P. 8, l. 179. Apollo speaks here, not as "forth-shower of Zeus," but in
his own person as a Hellenic God, hating this lust for punishment which
the Furies show: if torture is what they want, let them go to Persia and
the lands of the barbarians, where they can get it, but keep away from
Hellas and Delphi.</p>

<p>P. 10, l. 206. "And revilest us who guide his feet?" A quibble, which
Apollo answers by another.</p>

<p>P. 10, l. 212. "'Twas not one blood": It is the Furies who first raise
this sophism about the "common blood." In reality such a plea on behalf
of a wife who had murdered her husband would no more be admitted in
ancient law than in modern. But the Erînyes are supposed by the poet to
represent (1) the primitive "matriarchal" society which preceded the
introduction of marriage and civic life, and (2) a blind law based on
purely physical considerations: hence Apollo's answer: "Your insistence
on the physical blood-tie destroys all moral values. It is love and
trust, not mere blood, that matter." He has also a physiological
argument with which to meet their quibble in the trial scene (p. <a href="#Page_33">33</a>, l.
660).</p>

<p>P. 11, l. 229. "Thou hast thy greatness by the Throne of God": i.e. You
have a Portion of your own, which you value as we value ours.</p>

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_55" id="Page_55">[Pg 55]</a></span></p>

<p>P. 12, ll. 235 ff. Orestes has been hunted over the face of the world
for years and has at last made his way, bleeding, to Athena's Image in
Athens. The Furies are only a short way behind, tracking him by the
blood.</p>

<p>The question has been raised what Image of Athena this is, and whether
the scene is on the Acropolis or the Areopagus, or elsewhere. To ask
such a question is to press too hard the ideal geography of ancient
poetry. The scene is Athens, though sometimes we may have to think of
one part of Athens rather than another. Similarly, in the <i>Helena</i> the
scene is Egypt, though we are sometimes on the banks of the Nile,
sometimes on the sea-shore, sometimes at the Isle of Pharos; so in the
<i>Agamemnon</i> the beacon from Troy to Argos starts from Mount Ida. The
real Mount Ida was about thirty miles in the wrong direction, but the
ideal Ida was simply the mountain of Troy.</p>

<p>P. 14, l. 270. "Parent or guest or god": These are the three classes of
persons towards whom primitive man has duties: (1) the gods; (2) the
kindred, in which the parents take the chief place; (3) those aliens to
whom he had specially bound himself by the tie of hospitality.</p>

<p>P. 14, l. 276. Orestes calls Athena to come to his aid, and explains
that his touch does not defile her Image, and that he is at liberty to
speak.—The reasons are: first, it is so long ago and he has suffered so
much. Even such a defilement as his does not last for ever. Secondly, he
was fully purified at Delphi in the regular way, new blood (of swine)
being poured upon him to cover the old blood, and then both washed off
together. Thirdly, he has, as a matter of fact, spoken to many people
with no bad results to them.—It looks as if there was some<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_56" id="Page_56">[Pg 56]</a></span> ceremonial
difficulty which Aeschylus had to meet, in making the unacquitted
murderer embrace the Image of Athena or the Altar at Delphi.</p>

<p>P. 15, ll. 293, 295. According to one legend, the epithet "Tritonia,"
traditionally applied to Athena, meant that she was born at Lake
Tritonis in Libya. Phlegra was the scene of the Battle between the Gods
and Giants; it is interesting that Aeschylus seems to conceive it as a
continuous battle, not an incident in the past.</p>

<p>P. 15, l. 299. Orestes' prayer is followed by silence; a pause and no
answer. Then the triumphant cry of the Fury, and the Binding Song to fix
his despair. Then at l. 397, when hope had failed, Athena's entrance.</p>

<p>Pp. 16-19, ll. 321-396. This song falls into two parts: a solemn and
even philosophical statement of the place of the Avengers in the Cosmos,
and a magical chorus or "Binding Song," sinister and terrifying.
"Binding charms" or <i>Defixiones</i> play a prominent part in ancient magic,
and are sufficiently numerous to have a special volume of the <i>Corpus
Inscriptionum</i> to themselves.</p>

<p>The Furies here explain that their business is to punish sin: they have
no other function, and therefore are repugnant to the Gods—much as a
hangman or a mediaeval torturer is, or was, repellent to ordinary
society. Unjustly, since he was only doing his appointed duty.</p>

<p>P. 17, l. 356. The Foe within the Dwelling. A murderer is one who
behaves like the enemy inside his own household.</p>

<p>P. 20, l. 400. Athena comes from Sigêum in the neighbourhood of Troy,
which in the time of Aeschylus had long been part of the Athenian
Empire.<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_57" id="Page_57">[Pg 57]</a></span> Tradition said that it had been given by the Greek army to the
"Sons of Theseus" (the Athenians) for their services in the Trojan War.</p>

<p>P. 20, ll. 404 f. In the MS. two alternative lines are given, one to be
used if Athena entered flying <i>ex machina</i> through the air, the other if
it was more convenient for her to enter on a chariot. I have chosen the
first. (The other may be translated:</p>

<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span class="i6">Thence came I speeding, these young steeds of war<br></span>
<span class="i6">Impetuous yoked beneath my fiery car.)<br></span>
</div></div>

<p>Pp. 20-22, ll. 415-435. The dialogue between Athena and the Furies is
significant. They state their position impressively: to ordinary gods
and mortals they are abominable, but Night loves them and "the wronged
ones in the darkness" see in them their prayers personified. On the
other hand, Athena's question in l. 426, "What motive had he?" is just
what they cannot answer or consider. "He has sinned; smite him," is the
whole of their doctrine.</p>

<p>This explains the point about the oath. The Furies follow the old ordeal
by oath: the only trial permitted to the accused man is that both
parties can be made to swear. If the accused can swear that he did not
commit the crime, well and good. If he cannot, he is guilty. This leaves
out of account any inquiry into justification or extenuating
circumstances or even intention. Hence Athena condemns it, and
eventually substitutes a trial by free inquiry into the whole of the
facts.</p>

<p>P. 23, ll. 470 ff. "A mystery graver to decide Than mortal dreameth."
Because it involves the whole problem of forgiveness. To reject the
suppliant who has tried his best to do right is an offence; yet to save
a particular sinner from the due consequence of his sin is an offence
too. If one guilty<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_58" id="Page_58">[Pg 58]</a></span> man is to go unpunished, what remains of the Law?
Athena decides to found a tribunal to inquire into the whole case and
decide as it may think just, and this is the origin of the famous Court
of the Areopagus. The Furies, as soon as they hear of this new-fangled
form of trial, are bewildered and begin to feel that they have been
deceived. Their simple rule, that the doer shall suffer, is no longer
holding good.</p>

<p>Pp. 24-27, ll. 490-565. The above leads on to the main argument of this
fine lyric. "Spare the criminal, and the law is broken; and then there
will be no protection for the helpless and innocent. Society cannot do
without Fear, though of course it must be the Fear of Law. The righteous
and law-fearing man may suffer, but is never utterly lost; the
law-breaker may succeed for a time, but in the end he is destroyed."</p>

<p>Pp. 27 ff., ll. 566-777. The Trial Scene, though curious, is perhaps
below the level of the rest of the play. For one thing, I think it is
deliberately set, like the play scene in <i>Hamlet</i>, one remove further
from reality. As the play in general is to real life, so is the Trial
Scene to the play. Further, the acquittal of Orestes does not depend on
the arguments used in the trial, but on the Will of Zeus, which is an
ultimate fact not dependent on argument. The interest lies in the
foundation of the Court of the Areopagus, as a tribunal superseding the
blood-feud, the ordeal by oath, and all the rigid and unreasoning
practices of primitive justice, by a justice which can understand and
therefore sympathize.</p>

<p>The arguments run roughly as follows:—</p>

<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Prosecution.</span></p>

<p>Did the prisoner kill his mother? He admits it. He must die.</p>

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_59" id="Page_59">[Pg 59]</a></span></p>

<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Defence.</span></p>

<p>Apollo ordered him to kill, because she had killed her husband.—Why did
you not pursue her?</p>

<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Prosecution.</span></p>

<p>A husband is not a blood relation. (A mere quibble, like Portia's pound
of flesh without blood.)</p>

<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Defence.</span></p>

<p>If it comes to that, neither is a mother. The best physiologists say
that the human mother is in function exactly like Mother Earth. She
provides the soil for the seed, she does not provide the seed itself.</p>

<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Prosecution.</span></p>

<p>A monstrous doctrine, to deny a mother's sacred blood!</p>

<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Defence.</span></p>

<p>No more monstrous than to deny the bond between husband and wife.</p>

<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Apollo's Evidence.</span></p>

<p>When I commanded the prisoner to kill his mother I merely revealed the
Will of Zeus. That is the highest of all laws.</p>

<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Cross-Examined.</span></p>

<p>"If Zeus thinks so much of the sanctity of the father, does he think
nothing of the mother?"—"The two cases were not parallel." "Did not
Zeus bind his own father?"—"You are trying to make mischief. Zeus knows
how to repair any wrong he may have done in the past. He learns and
heals."</p>

<p>"Are you not polluted by touching a murderer?"</p>

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_60" id="Page_60">[Pg 60]</a></span></p>

<p>"No: Zeus himself touched and forgave the first murderer, Ixîon, when he
came to him in supplication."</p>

<p class="center"><span class="smcap">Athena</span>&nbsp;&nbsp; (<i>to the</i> <span class="smcap">Judges</span>).</p>

<p>Decide according to your consciences; for me, I belong utterly to Zeus
and my will is his will. Therefore my vote is for acquittal.</p>

<p>P. 27, l. 570. Apparently seats are placed on the Stage or round the
Orchestra for the Judges. They are accompanied by a crowd of Athenian
citizens, women and children among them, who form the Chorus in the
final scene. See pp. <a href="#Page_49">49</a> f.</p>

<p>P. 28, ll. 576 ff. Apollo appears both as a witness and as a patron or
sympathizer: quite an important character in ancient justice.</p>

<p>P. 29, l. 589. The three bouts: of an ordinary wrestling match.</p>

<p>P. 31, l. 610. "I can no more": Orestes is at the end of his forces. He
can speak no more, and merely longs to have his fate settled somehow.
Cf. his words to Athena, p. <a href="#Page_23">23</a>, l. 468.</p>

<p>P. 32, l. 632. A marble bed, etc. The text seems defective here. The
same kind of marble vessel served both as a bath and as a sarcophagus.</p>

<p>P. 32, l. 641. Did he not bind his father and his king: There is often
an awkward clash between the Zeus of Aeschylus' exalted conception and
the Zeus of accepted mythology. Still, it is quite in consonance with
Aeschylus' conception that Zeus should have done violence; and then
learned better and made amends.</p>

<p>P. 33, l. 660. Cf. p. <a href="#Page_30">30</a>, l. 606 above. This theory of generation was
largely held in antiquity, and has only been disproved in recent times.
See Aristotle, <i>De Gen Anim.</i>, Book 4. Eur., <i>Orestes</i>, 552 ff.</p>

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_61" id="Page_61">[Pg 61]</a></span></p>

<p>P. 34, l. 682. What none before hath given: i.e. hitherto they have only
gone by mechanical tests and ordeals; now they have tried to find the
full truth. The Council of the Areopagus was a Council of Elders, of the
type usual in ancient Indo-European Societies, reinforced, like the
Roman Senate by the co-optation of all ex-magistrates ("Archontes"). It
exercised a general supervision over the state, especially in matters of
religious pollution. At the time of the Persian invasion it seems to
have been the only organ of the constitution which held firm, and
consequently for the next seventeen years it exercised a predominant
influence over Athens. In the year 461-460, three years before this
play, its political powers were severely cut down by the democratic
party led by Ephialtes, but its jurisdiction in cases of blood-pollution
was left. If we ask what the political bearing of the <i>Eumenides</i> was,
in a time of fierce party feeling, the answer is not hard to find.
Aeschylus preaches reconciliation (pp. <a href="#Page_45">45</a>, <a href="#Page_48">48</a>) and magnifies the
original function of the Areopagus, which it still retains.</p>

<p>P. 38, l. 751. One thrown pebble: A proverb referring to the pebble or
stone of the sea-shore used for voting. (Cf. p. <a href="#Page_37">37</a>, l. 741).</p>

<p>P. 38, l. 754. An Argive alliance was traditional in Athens. However,
after this one passionate speech we almost forget Orestes. His case has
raised an issue so much greater than itself.</p>

<p>Pp. 39 ff., ll. 792-890. Athena's speeches. It is difficult to say what
particular plea of Athena's won the Erînyes over, and transformed them
to "<i>Eumenides</i> (<i>Kindly Ones</i>)." The effect of her patience and
persuasion was cumulative. But l. 885 gives the essential test: "Do they
believe in Persuasion, which is the gift of Zeus and the office of
Athena?" That<span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_62" id="Page_62">[Pg 62]</a></span> is, "Do they admit that there is a place in the Law for
reason and understanding?" If so, they will accept their new position,
expressing a truer law than the old.</p>

<p>P. 39, l. 897. The Younger Gods are the Gods of the new dispensation,
the followers of Zeus.</p>

<p>P. 41, l. 834. Why should marriage and childbirth fall under the special
charge of the Erînyes? Because the Chthonian (or underworld) Powers
punish transgression by barrenness and similar curses, while they reward
normal conduct by sending up the fruits of the Earth, including the
young of animals and men. Also the old female goddesses, dating from
matriarchal times, were naturally concerned with women's affairs.</p>

<p>P. 45, l. 864. "War with the stranger, yes . . . but not the mad
bird-rage that slays at home": The dates here are significant: <span class="smcap">b.c.</span> 461
Kimon, the aristocratic leader, banished: 460 the Areopagus attacked and
reduced in power: in return Ephialtes, the democratic leader, murdered.
458: An inscription of this year has been found, which records the names
of Athenian citizens killed in war on five different fronts—amazing
energy for a single city: 457 Battle of Tanagra: Kimon asks to be
allowed to fight in the Athenian ranks; the request is refused, but his
friends take his armour into battle with them and place it at their
head. After the battle, which ended in defeat, Kimon is recalled.—War,
faction and reconciliation in abundance! Mr. R. W. Livingstone in
<i>J.H.S.</i> xlv. pp. 120 ff. has emphasized the influence which this
feud-torn atmosphere must have had in leading Aeschylus to his gospel of
forgiveness.</p>

<p>P. 44, l. 910. The ungodly: The Erînyes carry on the same functions as
before, but their "Moira" as punishers of the guilty falls into its due
proportion.</p>

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_63" id="Page_63">[Pg 63]</a></span></p>

<p>P. 49, l. 997. To neighbour Jove's eternal eyes: The great Olympieum, or
Temple of Zeus Olympios, was on the plain a little way from the
Acropolis.</p>

<p>P. 49, l. 1002. Your secret chambers: Amid the limestone rocks of the
Areopagus was a chasm through which rose a spring of dark water. It was
held to be a way to the Underworld. It also led to the seat of these
goddesses, called generally Semnai (Venerable) or Eumenides (Kindly
Ones) because their real name, Erînyes, was rather too awful for common
use.</p>

<p>P. 50, l. 1028. Robes of crimson dye: The late Walter Headlam pointed
out that a crimson robe was the mark of a <i>metoikos</i> or "resident alien"
received in Athens. That is what the Erînyes became when they accepted
their cavern.</p>

<p><br><br></p>
<hr style="width: 65%;">
<p><br><br></p>

<p><span class="pagenum"><a name="Page_64" id="Page_64">[Pg 64]</a></span></p>

<p class="smcen">GEORGE ALLEN &amp; UNWIN LTD.<br>

<small><span class="smcap">London:&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; 40&nbsp;&nbsp; Museum&nbsp;&nbsp; Street,&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; W.C.1<br>
Cape&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; Town:&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; 73&nbsp;&nbsp; St.&nbsp;&nbsp; George's&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; Street<br>
Sydney,&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; N.S.W.:&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; Wynward&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; Square<br>
Wellington,&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; N.Z.:&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; 4&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; Willis&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; Street</span></small>
</p>

<p><br><br></p>
<hr style="width: 65%;">
<p><br><br></p>

<p class="center"><b>Transcriber's Notes:-</b></p>

<p>The line numbers (vv. = "versae") refer to the lines in the original Greek text, not
the lines as translated.</p>

<p>Minor punctuation errors corrected.</p>

<p>[The end of <i>titleThe Eumenides</i> by Gilbert Murray]</p>

  

</body></html>