<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>The Eumenides</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="the-eumenides" epub:type="z3998:drama">
			<section id="the-eumenides-1" epub:type="z3998:scene">
				<p>The Scene represents the front of the Temple of <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Apollo</b> at Delphi; great doors at the back lead to the inner shrine and the central Altar. The Pythian <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Prophetess</b> is standing before the Doors.</p>
				<table>
					<tbody>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Prophetess</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>First of all Gods I worship in this prayer</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Earth, the primeval prophet; after her</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Themis, the Wise, who on her mother’s throne⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>So runs the tale⁠—sat second; by whose own</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Accepted will, with never strife nor stress,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Third reigned another earth-born Titaness,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Phoebê; from whom (for that he bears her name)</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To Phoebus as a birthtide gift it came.</span>
								</p>
								<p>
									<span>He left his isle, he left his Delian seas,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>He passed Athena’s wave-worn promontories,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In haste this great Parnassus to possess</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And Delphi, thronèd in the wilderness.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And with him came, to escort him and revere,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A folk born of Hephaistos, pioneer</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of God’s way, making sweet a bitter land.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And much this people and the King whose hand</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Then steered them, Delphos, glorified his name,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Till Zeus into his heart put mystic flame</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And prophet here enthroned him, fourth in use:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>So Loxias’ lips reveal the thought of Zeus.</span>
								</p>
								<p>
									<span>These gods be foremost in all prayers of mine,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Who have held the Throne. Next, She before the shrine,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Pallas, is praisèd, and the Nymphs who keep</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Yon old Corycian bird-belovèd steep,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Deep-caverned, where things blessèd come and go.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And Bromios walks the mountain, well I know,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Since first he led his Maenad host on high</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And doomed King Pentheus like a hare to die.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And Pleistos’ fountains and Poseidon’s power</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I call, and Him who brings the Perfect Hour,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Zeus, the Most Highest. With which prayers I go</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To seat me, priestess, on the Throne. And, oh,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>May God send blessing on mine entrance, more</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And deeper than He e’er hath sent of yore!</span>
								</p>
								<p>
									<span>If there be present men of Greece but not</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of Delphi, let them enter as the lot</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Ordains; I speak but as God leadeth me. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">She enters the Inner Shrine, and the stage is for a moment empty. Then she returns, grasping at the wall for support.</i></span>
									<br/>
									<span>Ah! Horrors, horrors, dire to speak or see,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>From Loxias’ chamber drive me reeling back.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My knees are weak beneath me, and I lack</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The strength to fly.⁠ ⁠… O hands, drag me from here</span>
									<br/>
									<span>If feet fail!⁠ ⁠… An old woman, and in fear,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A thing of naught, a babe in helplessness!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I made my way into the Holy Place,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And there, at the inmost Altar of the world,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A man abhorred of God, his body hurled</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Earthward in desperate prayer; blood on his hand</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Yet reeking, and a naked new-drawn brand</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Wreathed in beseeching wool, a suppliant’s weed</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of snow-white fleece⁠ ⁠… so much mine eyes could read.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But out in front of him a rout unknown</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of women sleepeth, flung from throne to throne.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Women? Nay, never women! Gorgons more:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And yet not like the Gorgon shapes of yore.⁠ ⁠…</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I saw a picture once of woman things</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That ravished Phineus’ banquet. But no wings</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Have these; all shadows, black, abominable.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The voices of their slumber rise and swell,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Back-beating, and their eyes drop gouts of gore.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Their garb, it is no garb to show before</span>
									<br/>
									<span>God’s altar nor the hearths of human kind.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I cannot read what lineage lies behind</span>
									<br/>
									<span>These shapes, nor what land, having born such breed,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Hath trembled not before and shall not bleed</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Hereafter. Let Apollo great in power</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Take to his care the peril of this hour:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Being Helper, Prophet, Seer of things unseen,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The stainèd hearth he knoweth to make clean. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">The <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Prophetess</b> departs. The doors open and reveal the inner shrine, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Orestes</b> at the Altar, the <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Furies</b> asleep about him, and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Apollo</b> standing over them.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Apollo</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I fail thee not. For ever more I stay,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Or watching at thy side or far away,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thy guard, and iron against thine enemies.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Even now my snares have closèd upon these,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The ragers sleep: the Virgins without love,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>So grey, so old, whom never god above</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Hath kissed, nor man, nor from the wilderness</span>
									<br/>
									<span>One wild beast. They were born for wickedness</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And sorrow; for in evil night they dwell,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And feed on the great darkness that is Hell,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Most hated by the Gods and human thought.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But none the less, fly thou and falter not.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For these shall hunt thee, ever on through earth</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Unwandered, through the vast lands of the North,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The sea-ways and the cities ringed with sea.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But faint not. Clasp thy travail unto thee;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>On till thou come to Pallas’ Rock, and fold</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thine arms in prayer about her image old.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In Athens there be hearts to judge, there be</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Words that bring peace; and I shall set thee free</span>
									<br/>
									<span>At last from all this woe.⁠—If thou didst kill</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thy mother, was it not my word and will?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orestes</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Not to betray thou knowest. Oh, ponder yet</span>
									<br/>
									<span>One other lesson, Lord⁠—not to forget!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thy strength in doing can be trusted well. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Orestes</b> departs.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Apollo</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Remember! Let no fear thy spirit quell!</span>
								</p>
								<p>
									<span>Do thou, O Hermes, brother of my blood,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Watch over him. Thou guide of man, make good</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The name thou bearest, shepherding again</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My suppliant. Him who pitieth suffering men</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Zeus pitieth, and his ways are sweet on earth. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Apollo</b>. Presently enter the <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Ghost</b> of <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Clytemnestra</b>. She watches the sleeping <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Furies</b>.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Ghost</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Ye sleep. O God, and what are sleepers worth?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>’Tis you, have left me among all the dead</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Dishonoured. Alway, for that blood I shed,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Rebuke and hissing cease not, and I go</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Wandering in shame. Oh, hear!⁠ ⁠… For that old blow</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I struck still I am hated, but for his</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Who smote me, being of my blood, there is</span>
									<br/>
									<span>No wrath in all the darkness: there is none</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Cares for a mother murdered by her son.</span>
								</p>
								<p>
									<span>Open thine heart to see this gash!⁠—<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">She shows the wound in her throat.</i> In sleep</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The heart hath many eyes and can see deep:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>’Tis daylight makes man’s fate invisible.</span>
								</p>
								<p>
									<span>Oft of my bounty ye have lapt your fill;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Oft the sad peace of wineless cups to earth</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I have poured, and midmurk feastings on your hearth</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Burned, when no other god draws near to eat.</span>
								</p>
								<p>
									<span>And all these things ye have cast beneath your feet,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And he is fled, fled lightly like a fawn</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Out of your nets! With mocking he is gone</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And twisting of the lips.⁠ ⁠… I charge you, hark!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>This is my life, my death. Oh, shake the dark</span>
									<br/>
									<span>From off you, Children of the Deep. ’Tis I,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Your dream, I, Clytemnestra, stand and cry. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Moaning among the <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Furies</b>.</i></span>
									<br/>
									<span>Moan on, but he is vanished and forgot.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>So strong the prayers of them that love me not! <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Moaning.</i></span>
									<br/>
									<span>Too sound ye sleep.⁠—And have ye for the dead</span>
									<br/>
									<span>No pity?⁠ ⁠… And my son, my murderer, fled! <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Groaning.</i></span>
									<br/>
									<span>Ye groan; ye slumber. Wake!⁠ ⁠… What task have ye</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To do on earth save to work misery? <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Groaning.</i></span>
									<br/>
									<span>Can sleep and weariness so well conspire</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To drain the fell she-dragon of her fire? <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Sharp repeated muttering: then words “At him! At him! Catch, catch, catch! Ah, beware!”</i></span>
									<br/>
									<span>Ah, hunting in your dreams, and clamorous yet,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Tired bloodhounds that can sleep but not forget!</span>
								</p>
								<p>
									<span>How now? Awake! Be strong! And faithful keep</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thy lust of pain through all the drugs of sleep.</span>
								</p>
								<p>
									<span>Thou feelst my scorn? Aye, feel and agonize</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Within; such words are scourges to the wise.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thy blood-mist fold about him, like a doom.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Waste him with vapour from thy burning womb.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A second chase is death!⁠ ⁠… Pursue! Pursue! <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">The <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Ghost</b> vanishes as the <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Furies</b> gradually wake.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Leader of the Furies</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Awake! Quick, waken her as I wake you!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thou sleepest? Rise; cast slumber from thy brain</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And search. Is our first hunt so all in vain?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Furies</td>
							<td>
								<p>
									<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Speaking severally.</i>
								</p>
								<blockquote epub:type="z3998:song">
									<p>
										<span>—O rage, rage and wrath! Friends, they have done me wrong!</span>
										<br/>
										<span>—Many and many a wrong I have suffered, mockeries all!</span>
										<br/>
										<span>—Evil and violent deeds, a shame that lingereth long</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i4">And bitter, bitter as gall!</span>
										<br/>
										<span>—The beast is out of the toils, out of the toils and away!</span>
										<br/>
										<span>—I slept, and I lost my prey.</span>
									</p>
									<p>
										<span>—What art thou, O Child of Zeus? A thief and a cozener!</span>
										<br/>
										<span>—Many and many a wrong I have suffered, mockeries all!</span>
										<br/>
										<span>—Hast broken beneath thy wheels them that were holy and old?</span>
										<br/>
										<span>—Many and many a wrong I have suffered, mockeries all!</span>
										<br/>
										<span>—A godless man and an evil son, he but kneels in prayer,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i4">And straight he is ta’en to thy fold.</span>
										<br/>
										<span>—Thou hast chosen the man who spilt his mother’s blood!</span>
										<br/>
										<span>—Are these things just, thou God?</span>
									</p>
									<p>
										<span>—As a raging charioteer mid-grippeth his goad to bite</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i4">Beneath the belly, beneath the flank, where the smart is hot,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i1">There riseth out of my dreams Derision with hands to smite;</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i1">As a wretch at the block is scourged when the scourger hateth aright,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i4">And the shuddering pain dies not.</span>
									</p>
									<p>
										<span>—These be the deeds ye do, ye Gods of the younger race:</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i4">Ye break the Law at your will; your high throne drips with gore,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i1">The foot is wet and the head. There is blood in the Holy Place!</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i1">The Heart of Earth uplifteth its foulness in all men’s face,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i4">Clean nevermore, nevermore!</span>
									</p>
									<p>
										<span>—Blood, thou holy Seer, there is blood on thy burning hearth.</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i4">Thine inmost place is defiled, and thine was the will and the word.</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i1">Thou hast broken the Law of Heaven, exalted the things of Earth;</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i4">The hallowed Portions of old thine hand hath blurred.</span>
									</p>
									<p>
										<span>—Thou knowest to hurt my soul; yea, but shalt save not him.</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i4">The earth may open and hide, but never shall he be freed.</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i1">Defiling all he goes, there where in exile dim</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i4">Many defilers more wait and bleed.</span>
									</p>
								</blockquote>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Apollo</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Apollo</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Avaunt, I charge you! Get ye from my door!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Darken this visionary dome no more!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Quick, lest ye meet that snake of bitter wing</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That leaps a-sudden from my golden string,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And in your agony spue forth again</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The black froth ye have sucked from tortured men!</span>
								</p>
								<p>
									<span>This floor shall be no harbour to your feet.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Are there not realms where Law upon her seat</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Smites living head from trunk? Where prisoners bleed</span>
									<br/>
									<span>From gougèd eyes? Children with manhood’s seed</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Blasted are there; maimed foot and severed hand,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And stoning, and a moan through all the land</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of men impaled to die. There is the board</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Whereat ye feast, and, feasting, are abhorred</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of heaven.⁠—But all the shapes of you declare</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Your souls within. Some reeking lion’s lair</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Were your fit dwelling, not this cloistered Hall</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of Mercy, which your foulness chokes withal.</span>
								</p>
								<p>
									<span>Out, ye wild goats unherded! Out, ye drove</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Accursed, that god nor devil dares to love! <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">During this speech the <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Furies</b> fly confusedly from the Temple down into the Orchestra. The <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Leader</b> turns.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Leader</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Phoebus Apollo, in thy turn give heed!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I hold thee not a partner in this deed;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thou hast wrought it all. The guilt is thine alone.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Apollo</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>What sayst thou there?⁠—One word, and then begone.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Leader</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Thou spakest and this man his mother slew.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Apollo</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I spoke, and he avenged his father. True.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Leader</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Thou stoodest by, to accept the new-shed gore.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Apollo</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I bade him turn for cleansing to my door.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Leader</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Ha! And revilest us who guide his feet?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Apollo</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Ye be not clean to approach this Mercy Seat.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Leader</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>We be by Law eternal what we be.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Apollo</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>And what is that? Reveal thy dignity.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Leader</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>We hunt from home his mother’s murderer.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Apollo</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>A husband-murdering woman, what of her?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Leader</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>’Twas not one blood in slayer and in slain.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Apollo</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>How? Would ye count as a light thing and vain</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The perfect bond of Hera and high Zeus?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Yea, and thy word dishonoured too the use</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of Cypris, whence love groweth to his best.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The fate-ordainèd meeting, breast to breast,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of man and woman is a tie more sure</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Than oath or pact, if Justice guards it pure.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>If them so joined ye heed not when they slay,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Nor rise in wrath, nor smite them on their way,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Unrighteous is thine hunting of this man,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Orestes. Why on him is all thy ban</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Unloosed? The other never broke thy rest⁠ ⁠…</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But Pallas, child of Zeus, shall judge this quest.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Leader</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I cleave to him. I leave him never more.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Apollo</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Oh, hunt thy fill! Make sorrow doubly sore.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Leader</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Abridge not thou the Portions of my lot.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Apollo</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Keep thou thy portions. I will touch them not.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Leader</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Thou hast thy greatness by the throne of God;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I⁠ ⁠… But the scent draws of that mother’s blood.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I come! I come! I hunt him to the grave.⁠ ⁠… <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">The <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Furies</b> go out on the track of <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Orestes</b>.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Apollo</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>’Tis mine then to bring succour, and to save</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My suppliant. Earth and Heaven are both afraid</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For God’s wrath, if one helpless is betrayed. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Apollo</b> returns behind the shrine, and the doors close. When they open again, they reveal, in place of <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Apollo’s</b> Central Altar, the Statue of <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Athena Parthenos</b>: the scene now represents the Temple of Athena in Athens.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Orestes</b>, worn with travel and suffering.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orestes</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Pallas Athena, from Apollo’s wing</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I come; receive in peace this hunted thing</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My sin no more polluteth, nor with hand</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Unpurified before thy throne I stand.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A blunted edge, grief-worn and sanctified</span>
									<br/>
									<span>By pain, where’er men traffic or abide,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>On, on, o’er land and sea I have made my way,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>True-purposed Loxias’ bidding to obey.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>At last I have found thy House; thine image I</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Clasp, and here wait thy judgement till I die. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">He throws himself down at the feet of the Statue, but no answer comes. Presently enter the <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Furies</b>, following him.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Leader</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Ha! Here he has passed. Spot reeketh upon spot.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Blood is a spy that points and babbles not.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Like hounds that follow some sore-wounded fawn,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>We smell the way that blood and tears are gone,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And follow.⁠—Oh, my belly gaspeth sore</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With toils man-wasting; I can chase no more.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Through all the ways of the world I have shepherded</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My lost sheep, and above the salt sea sped,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Wingless pursuing, swift as any sail.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And now ’tis here, meseemeth, he doth quail</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And cower.⁠—Aye, surely it is here; the smell</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of man’s blood laughs to meet me. All is well.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Furies</td>
							<td>
								<p>
									<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Searching.</i>
								</p>
								<blockquote epub:type="z3998:song">
									<p>
										<span class="i3">Ha, search, search again!</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i4">Seek for him far and wide.</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i4">Shall this man fly or hide</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i3">And the unatonèd stain</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i3">Of his mother’s blood be vain?</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i3">Haha! Lo where he lies!</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i3">And comfort is in his eyes!</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i3">He hath made his arms a wreath</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i4">For the knees of the Deathless One,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i3">And her judgement challengeth</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i4">On the deed his hands have done.</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i3">In vain! All in vain!</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i4">When blood on the earth is shed,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i4">Blood of a mother dead,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i3">Ye shall gather it not again.</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i4">’Tis wet, ’tis vanishèd,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i3">Down in the dust like rain.</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i4">Thyself shalt yield instead,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i3">Living, from every vein,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i4">Thine own blood, rich and red,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i3">For our parchèd mouths to drain,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i4">Till my righteous heart be fed</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i3">With thy blood and thy bitter pain;</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i4">Till I waste thee like the dead,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i3">And cast thee among the slain,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i4">Till her wrong be comforted</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i3">And her wound no longer stain.</span>
									</p>
									<p>
										<span class="i3">The Law thou then shalt see;</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i4">That whoso of men hath trod</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i3">In sin against these three,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i4">Parent or Guest or God,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i3">That sin is unforgot,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i3">And the payment faileth not.</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i3">There liveth, for every man,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i4">Below, in the realm of Night,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i3">A judge who straighteneth</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i3">The crooked; his name is Death.</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i3">All life his eye doth scan</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i4">And recordeth right.</span>
									</p>
								</blockquote>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orestes</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I have known much evil, and have learnt therein</span>
									<br/>
									<span>What divers roads man goes to purge his sin,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And when to speak and when be dumb; and eke</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In this thing a wise master bids me speak.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The blood upon this hand is fallen asleep</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And fades. And though a sin be ne’er so deep</span>
									<br/>
									<span>’Twill age with the aging years. When this of mine</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Was fresh, on Phoebus’ hearth with blood of swine</span>
									<br/>
									<span>’Twas washed and blurred. ’Twere a long tale since then,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To tell how I have spoke with many men</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In scatheless parle. And now, with lips of grace,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Once more I pray the Lady of this place,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Athena, to mine aid. Let her but come;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Myself, mine Argive people and my home</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Shall without war be hers, hers true of heart</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And changeless. Therefore, wheresoe’er thou art,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In some far wilderness of Libyan earth,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>By those Tritonid waters of thy birth;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Upgirt for deeds or veilèd on thy throne;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Or is it Phlegra’s field thou brood’st upon,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Guiding the storm, like some bold Lord of War,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Oh, hear! A goddess heareth though afar:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Bring me deliverance in this mine hour! <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">He waits expectant, but there is no answer.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Leader</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Not Lord Apollo’s, not Athena’s power</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Shall reach thee any more. Forgot, forgot,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thou reelest back to darkness, knowing not</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Where in man’s heart joy dwelleth; without blood,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A shadow, flung to devils for their food!</span>
								</p>
								<p>
									<span>Wilt answer not my word? Wilt spurn thereat,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thou that art mine, born, doomed, and consecrate</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My living feast, at no high altar slain?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Hark thou this song to bind thee like a chain!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Furies</td>
							<td>
								<p>
									<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">As they move into position for the Dance.</i>
								</p>
								<blockquote epub:type="z3998:song">
									<p>
										<span class="i3">Up, let us tread the dance, and wind⁠—</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i4">The hour is come!⁠—our shuddering spell.</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i4">Show how this Band apportions well</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i3">Their fated burdens to mankind.</span>
									</p>
									<p>
										<span class="i3">Behold, we are righteous utterly.</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i4">The man whose hand is clean, no wrath</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i4">From us shall follow: down his path</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i3">He goeth from all evil free.</span>
									</p>
									<p>
										<span class="i3">But whoso slays and hides withal</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i4">His red hand, swift before his eyes</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i4">True witness for the dead we rise:</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i3">We are with him to the end of all. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Being now in position they begin the Binding Song.</i></span>
									</p>
								</blockquote>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Some Furies</td>
							<td>
								<blockquote epub:type="z3998:song">
									<p>
										<span class="i3">Mother, who didst bear a being</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i3">Dread to the eyeless and the seeing,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i6">Night, my Mother!</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i3">Leto’s Child would wrong me, tear</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i3">From my clutch this trembling hare,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i3">My doomèd prey: he bore to slay,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i3">And shall he not the cleansing bear,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i6">He, none other?</span>
									</p>
								</blockquote>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</td>
							<td>
								<blockquote epub:type="z3998:song">
									<p>
										<span class="i4">But our sacrifice to bind,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i4">Lo, the music that we wind,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i4">How it dazeth and amazeth</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i5">And the will it maketh blind,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i4">As it moves without a lyre</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i4">To the throb of my desire;</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i4">’Tis a chain about the brain,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i5">’Tis a wasting of mankind.</span>
									</p>
								</blockquote>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Other Furies</td>
							<td>
								<blockquote epub:type="z3998:song">
									<p>
										<span class="i3">Thus hath Fate, through weal and woe,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i3">For our Portion as we go</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i4">Spun the thread:</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i3">Whenso mortal man in sin</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i3">’Brueth hand against his kin,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i3">Mine till death He wandereth,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i3">And freedom never more shall win,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i5">Not when dead.</span>
									</p>
								</blockquote>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</td>
							<td>
								<blockquote epub:type="z3998:song">
									<p>
										<span class="i3">But our sacrifice to bind,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i3">Lo, the music that we wind,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i3">How it dazeth and amazeth</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i5">And the will it maketh blind,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i3">As it moves without a lyre</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i3">To the throb of my desire;</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i3">’Tis a chain about the brain,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i5">’Tis a wasting of mankind.</span>
									</p>
								</blockquote>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Some Furies</td>
							<td>
								<blockquote epub:type="z3998:song">
									<p>
										<span class="i3">Since the hour we were begot</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i5">Of this rite am I the priest;</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i3">Other gods may share it not;</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i5">Nor is any man nor beast</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i3">That dare eat the food we eat</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i3">Nor among us take his seat;</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i3">For no part have I nor lot</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i5">In the white robe and the feast.</span>
									</p>
								</blockquote>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</td>
							<td>
								<blockquote epub:type="z3998:song">
									<p>
										<span class="i3">For the tale I make mine own</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i3">Is of houses overthrown,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i3">When the Foe within the Dwelling</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i5">Slays a brother and is flown:</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i3">Up and after him, Io!</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i3">While the blood is still a-flow,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i3">Though his strength be full and swelling,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i5">We shall waste him, flesh from bone!</span>
									</p>
								</blockquote>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Other Furies</td>
							<td>
								<blockquote epub:type="z3998:song">
									<p>
										<span class="i3">Would they take thee from the care</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i5">We have guarded thee withal?</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i3">Would the Gods disown our prayer</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i5">Till no Law be left at all?</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i3">Yea, because of blood that drips</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i3">As aforetime from our lips,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i3">And the world’s hate that we bear,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i5">God hath cast us from His hall!</span>
									</p>
								</blockquote>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</td>
							<td>
								<blockquote epub:type="z3998:song">
									<p>
										<span class="i3">I am on them as they fly,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i3">With a voice out of the sky,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i3">And my armèd heel is o’er them</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i5">To fall crashing from on high.</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i3">There be fliers far and fast,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i3">But I trip them at the last,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i3">And my arms are there before them,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i5">And shall crush them ere they die!</span>
									</p>
								</blockquote>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Divers Furies</td>
							<td>
								<blockquote epub:type="z3998:song">
									<p>
										<span>—The glories of Man that were proud where the sunlight came,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i1">Below in the dark are wasted and cast to shame;</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i3">For he trembles at the hearing</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i3">Of the Black Garments nearing,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">And the beating of the feet, like flame</span>
									</p>
									<p>
										<span>—He falls and knows not; the blow hath made blind his eyes;</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i1">And above hangs Sin, as a darkening of the skies,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i3">And a great voice swelling</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i3">Like a mist about his dwelling,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">And sobbing in the mist and cries.</span>
									</p>
									<p>
										<span>—For so it abideth: subtle are we to plan,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i3">Sure to fulfil, and forget not any Sin;</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i3">And Venerable they call us, but none can win</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i4">Our pardon for child of man.</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i1">Unhonoured and undesired though our kingdom be,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i3">Where the sun is dead and no god in all the skies,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i1">Great crags and trackless, alike for them that see,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i4">And them of the wasted eyes;</span>
									</p>
									<p>
										<span>—What mortal man but quaketh before my power,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i3">And boweth in worship to hear my rule of doom,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i3">God-given of old, fate-woven on the ageless loom</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i4">And ripe to the perfect hour?</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i1">To the end of all abideth mine ancient Right,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i3">Whose word shall be never broke nor its deed undone,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i1">Though my seat is below the Grave, in the place where sight</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i4">Fails and there is no Sun.</span>
									</p>
								</blockquote>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Athena</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Athena</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Far off I heard the calling of my name,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Beside Scamander, where I took in claim</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The new land which the Achaean lords and kings,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In royal spoil for many warfarings,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Gave, root and fruit for ever, as mine own</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Exempted prize, to Theseus’ sons alone.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thence came I speeding, while behind me rolled</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My wingless aegis, floating fold on fold.</span>
								</p>
								<p>
									<span>But these strange visitants⁠ ⁠… I tremble not</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Beholding, yet I marvel. Who and what</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Are ye? I speak to all. And who is he</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Who round mine image clings so desperately?</span>
								</p>
								<p>
									<span>But ye are like no earth-seed ever sown,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>No goddess-shape that Heaven hath looked upon,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Nor any semblance borne of human kind⁠ ⁠…</span>
								</p>
								<p>
									<span>Howbeit, ye have not wronged me. I were blind</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To right and custom did I speak you ill.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Leader</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Virgin of God most high, have all thy will.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Still-weeping Night knows us the brood she bears;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The wronged ones in the darkness call us Prayers.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Athena</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I know your lineage and the names ye hold.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Leader</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Our office and our lot can soon be told.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Athena</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Make clear thy word, that all be understood.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Leader</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>We hunt from home the shedder of man’s blood.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Athena</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>What end appoint ye to that flight of his?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Leader</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>A land where none remembereth what joy is.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Athena</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>And such a chase on this man thou wilt cry?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Leader</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Who dared to be his mother’s murderer, aye,</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Athena</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>What goaded him? Some fear, some unseen wrath?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Leader</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>What goad could drive a man on such a path?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Athena</td>
							<td>
								<p>
									<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Looking at <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Orestes</b>.</i>
								</p>
								<div epub:type="z3998:verse">
									<p>
										<span>Why speaketh one alone, when two are there?</span>
									</p>
								</div>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Leader</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>He will not swear, nor challenge me to swear.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Athena</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Which wouldst thou, to seem righteous, or to be?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Leader</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>What meanst thou there? Speak out thy subtlety.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Athena</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Let no bare oath the deeper right subdue.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Leader</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Try thou the cause, then, and give judgement true.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Athena</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Ye trust me this whole issue to decide?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Leader</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Who would not trust thee? True thou art and tried.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Athena</td>
							<td>
								<p>
									<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Turning to <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Orestes</b>.</i>
								</p>
								<div epub:type="z3998:verse">
									<p>
										<span>Strange man, and what in turn hast thou to advance?</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Thy land and lineage, and thy long mischance</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Show first, then make thine answer to their laws.</span>
										<br/>
										<span>If truly in the justice of thy cause</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Trusting, thou clingest here in need so dire</span>
										<br/>
										<span>To mine own shape, hard by my deathless fire,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>In fearful prayer, as lost Ixîon prayed,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Make to all these thine answer unafraid.</span>
									</p>
								</div>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orestes</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Most high Athena, let me from the last</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of these thy questionings one fear outcast.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Pollution is not in me, nor with hand</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Blood-reeking cleave I to thine altar-strand;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In sign whereof, behold, I have cast away</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That silence which the man of blood alway</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Observeth, till some hand, that hath the power</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To cleanse the sins of man, new blood shall shower</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of swine upon him, drowning the old stain.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I have been cleansed again and yet again</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In others’ dwellings, both by blood that fell</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And running rivers that have washed me well.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Be that care then forgot. My name and birth</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Are quickly told. I am sprung of Argive earth;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My father’s name was known upon thy lips,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Agamemnon, marshal of a thousand ships,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With whom thou madest Troy, that city of pride,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>No more a city. He returning died,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Not kingly. ’Twas my mother black of heart</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Met him and murdered, snaring him with art</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of spangled webs.⁠ ⁠… Alas, that robe of wrath,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That cried to heaven the blood-stain of the bath!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Then came long exile; then, returning, I</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Struck dead my mother. Nought will I deny;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>So, for my sire belovèd, death met death.</span>
								</p>
								<p>
									<span>And Loxias in these doings meriteth</span>
									<br/>
									<span>His portion, who foretold strange agonies</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To spur me if I left unsmitten these</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That slew him.⁠ ⁠… Take me thou, and judge if ill</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I wrought or righteously. I will be still</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And praise thy judgement, whatsoe’er betide.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Athena</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>This is a mystery graver to decide</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Than mortal dreameth. Nor for me ’twere good</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To sift the passionate punishments of blood.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Since thou hast cast thee on my altar stair</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Perfect by suffering, from thy stains that were</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Made clean and harmless, suppliant at my knee,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I, in my City’s name, must pity thee</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And chide not. Yet these too, I may not slight:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>They have their portion in the Orb of Right</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Eternal. If they are baffled of their will,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The wrath of undone Justice shall distil</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Through all the air a poison; yea, a pall</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Intolerable about the land shall fall</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And groaning sickness. Doubtful thus it lies:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To cast them out or keep them in mine eyes</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Were equal peril, and I must ponder sore.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Yet, seeing fate lays this matter at my door,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Myself not judging, I will judges find</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In mine own City, who will make no blind</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Oath-challenge to pursuer and pursued,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But follow this new rule, by me indued</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As law for ever. Proofs and witnesses</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Call ye on either side, and set to these</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Your oaths. Such oath helps Justice in her need.</span>
								</p>
								<p>
									<span>I will go choose the noblest of the breed</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of Athens, and here bring them to decide</span>
									<br/>
									<span>This bloody judgement even as truth is tried,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And then, their oath accomplished, to depart,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Right done, and no transgression in their heart. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Athena</b>. The Shrine is closed, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Orestes</b> remaining inside at the foot of the Image.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Other Furies</td>
							<td>
								<blockquote epub:type="z3998:song">
									<p>
										<span>—This day there is a new Order born.</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i3">If this long coil of judging and of strife</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i3">Shall uplift the mother-murderer to life,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i1">Shall the World not mark it, and in scorn</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i3">Go forth to do evil with a smile?</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i3">Yea, for parents hereafter there is guile</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i4">That waiteth, and great anguish; by a knife</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i1">In a child’s hand their bosom shall be torn.</span>
									</p>
									<p>
										<span>—No wrath shall be stirred by any deed,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i3">No doom from the Dark Watchers any more.</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i3">Lo, to all death I cast wide the door!</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i1">And men, while they whisper of the need</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">Of their neighbour, shall pray tremblingly within</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">For some rest and diminishing of sin.</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i3">They will praise the old medicine that of yore</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i1">Brought comfort, and marvel as they bleed.</span>
									</p>
									<p>
										<span>—Vainly will they make their moan?</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">Vainly cry in sore despite,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i1">“Help, ye Watchers on your throne,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i4">Help, O Right!”</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i1">Many a father so shall cry,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">Many a mother, new in pain;</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i1">Their vain sobbing floateth by:</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">“The great House is fallen again!</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i4">Law shall die!”</span>
									</p>
									<p>
										<span>—Times there be when Fear is good,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">And the Watcher in the breast</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i1">Needs must reign in masterhood.</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i4">Aye, ’tis best</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i1">Through much straitening to be wise.</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">Who that hath no fear at all</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i1">In the sunlight of his eyes,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">Man or City, but shall fall</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i4">From Right somewise?</span>
									</p>
									<p>
										<span>—The life that walketh without rule,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i1">The life that is a tyrant’s fool,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i4">Thou shalt not praise.</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i1">O’er all man’s striving variously</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i1">God looketh, but, where’er it be,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i1">Gives to the Mean his victory.</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i1">And therefore know I and confess,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i1">The doomèd child of Godlessness</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i1">Is Pride of Man, and Pride’s excess;</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i1">Only from health of heart shall spring</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i1">What men desire, what poets sing,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i4">Stormless days.</span>
									</p>
									<p>
										<span>—Whate’er befall, the Throne of Right</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i1">Fear thou, and let no lucre bright</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i4">Seen suddenly,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i1">To spurn that Altar make thee blind;</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i1">For chastisement is hid behind,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i1">And the End waiteth, and shall bind.</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i1">Wherefore I charge thee, through all stress</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i1">Thy mother and thy father bless:</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i1">Herein, O Man, lies holiness.</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i1">And next, of all within thy fold,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i1">The stranger and the friendless hold</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i4">In sanctity.</span>
									</p>
									<p>
										<span>—He that is righteous uncompelled and free</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i4">His life’s way taketh</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i1">Not without happiness; and utterly</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i1">Cast to destruction shall he never be.</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i1">But he who laugheth and is bold in sin,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i1">From every port great gain he gathers in,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Rejoicing; but methinks shall cast away</span>
										<br/>
										<span>All, with much haste and trembling, on the day</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">When sails are stript by the edge of wind and sea</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i5">And yard-arm breaketh.</span>
									</p>
									<p>
										<span>He yearns, he strives, amid the whirling sea,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">But none shall hear;</span>
										<br/>
										<span>And loud his Daemon laughs, saying “This is he</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Who vaunted him these things should never be!”</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Who now is weeping, weak in the endless foam,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>And sees the foreland where beyond is home,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>But shall not pass it: on the rocks of Right</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Wrecked is his life’s long glory; and the night</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">Falls, and there lives from all his agony</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i5">No word nor tear.</span>
									</p>
								</blockquote>
							</td>
						</tr>
					</tbody>
				</table>
			</section>
			<section id="the-eumenides-2" epub:type="z3998:scene">
				<p>The scene is now set with seats for the Council of the Areopagus. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Athena</b>, the <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Judges</b>, a <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Herald</b>, a crowd of <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Citizens</b>, the <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Furies</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Orestes</b>.</i></p>
				<table>
					<tbody>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Athena</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Herald, thine office! See that yonder crowds</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Hold back, and let this piercer of the clouds,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Filled with man’s breath, the Tuscan trumpet, blow</span>
									<br/>
									<span>His fiery summons to the host below.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Then all be silence, while the people fill</span>
									<br/>
									<span>This Council Hall. Thus shall my sovran will</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And ordinance to this people, great and small,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Be known for ever, and upheld by all</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Within our gates; and thus my wardens do</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Justice this day, discerning false from true.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Apollo</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Leader</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Apollo, thou! Go, reign where thou art king!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>What portion hast thou in this doom-saying?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Apollo</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I come to bear my witness. This is one</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Who in great anguish came to me alone</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For refuge, and knelt suppliant at my shrine.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Therefore the cleansing of his stain is mine.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Likewise I share his plea, and on me take</span>
									<br/>
									<span>What guilt he bears for that dead mother’s sake.</span>
								</p>
								<p>
									<span>Ope thou the court, O Pallas, and, as well</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thou canst, establish justice durable.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Athena</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Ho! Opened is the Court; and yours the speech.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">To the <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Furies</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>He who pursueth, speaking first, can teach</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Best his whole grief, and how the evil grew.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Leader</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Many are we, yet shall our words be few.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Make answer thou, point against point. And say</span>
									<br/>
									<span>First this one thing: thy mother didst thou slay?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orestes</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I slew her.⁠ ⁠… Aye. Denied it cannot be.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Leader</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Aha! The first of the three bouts to me!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orestes</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Too soon ye vaunt. I am not yet outsped.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Leader</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>How didst thou slay? That also must be said.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orestes</td>
							<td>
								<p>
									<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">With an effort.</i>
								</p>
								<div epub:type="z3998:verse">
									<p>
										<span>I will say it. I drew sword and clave her throat.</span>
									</p>
								</div>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Leader</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Who and what tempted thee? Who laid the plot?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orestes</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>He who is with me now, and witnesseth.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Leader</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>God’s prophet bade thee plot thy mother’s death?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orestes</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Yes: and hath never failed me to this day.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Leader</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>And when the vote is cast, what wilt thou say?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orestes</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I fear not. Helpers from my father’s grave.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Leader</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Go, mother-murderer! Call the dead to save!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orestes</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Two stains of death lay mingled on her hand.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Leader</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>How two? Let these who judge thee understand.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orestes</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>A husband and a father, both, she slew.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Leader</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>And death hath purged her. Shalt not thou die too?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orestes</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Ye never hunted her, for all her stain.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Leader</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>’Twas not one blood in slayer and in slain.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orestes</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>And are my mother’s blood and my blood one?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Leader</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>How did she feed thee else beneath her zone?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Caitiff! Thy mother’s blood wilt thou deny?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orestes</td>
							<td>
								<p>
									<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Overcome.</i>
								</p>
								<div epub:type="z3998:verse">
									<p>
										<span>I can no more.⁠ ⁠… Give witness, and reply,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Lord Phoebus, in my stead, if righteously</span>
										<br/>
										<span>I slew.⁠ ⁠… I slew: denied it cannot be:</span>
										<br/>
										<span>But rightly, or most foully⁠—as thine own</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Heart speaks, give judgement, and let all be known.</span>
									</p>
								</div>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Apollo</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Ye judges of Athena’s Court most high,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I come to speak before you faithfully,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Being God’s prophet: therefore truth is mine.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Nor ever spake I from my throne divine</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of man nor woman, land nor city wall,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Save by command of Him who ruleth all,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Zeus, the Olympian Father. Is there Right</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Holier than this, I charge ye think, or Might</span>
									<br/>
									<span>More mighty? Follow ye the All-father’s will:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>If oaths be strong, is Zeus not stronger still?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Leader</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>’Twas Zeus, thou tellest, laid this duty large</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Upon thy lips? ’Twas Zeus who bade thee charge</span>
									<br/>
									<span>This man to avenge his father and cast down,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As nothing worth, his mother’s sacred crown?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Apollo</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Are these the same? That a great man, raised high</span>
									<br/>
									<span>By royal sceptre, given of God, should die,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And die by a woman’s hand⁠—and not in war</span>
									<br/>
									<span>By Amazonian arrow, sped from far,⁠ ⁠…</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But⁠—Hear my tale, O Pallas, and ye too</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Who sit enthronèd to sift false from true;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>He came from battle after sufferings sore</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But greater glories, and she stood before</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The gate to greet and praise him, strewed his path</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With crimson robes and led him to his bath⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A marble bed!⁠—and o’er the end thereof</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Laid the great web and curtained it above,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To ensnare him as he rose; then, in the wide</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Unending folds, she smote him and he died!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>So died a man, ye hear it from my lips,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>All-honoured, War-Lord of a thousand ships;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And such a wife was she! Be stern, and smite</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The guilty, ye who sit to establish right!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Leader</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Doth Zeus count fatherhood so high a thing?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Who cast in bonds his father and his king,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Old Cronos? Are these things not contrary?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I charge ye, judges, hearken his reply.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Apollo</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Ye worms of hate, O ye that Gods abhor,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Bonds can be loosened; there is cure therefor,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And many and many a plan in God’s great mind</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To free the prisoners whom he erst did bind.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But once the dust hath drunk the blood of men</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Murdered, there is no gathering it again.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For that no magic doth my Father know,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Though all things else he changeth high and low</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Or fixeth, and no toil is in his breath.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Leader</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Is that thy pleading against this man’s death?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The kindred blood, his mother’s blood, the well</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of his own life, he hath spilt. How shall he dwell</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In Argos? In his home? What altar-stair,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>When Argos worships, will receive his prayer?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>What love-bowl of the brethren cleanse his hand?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Apollo</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>That too I answer; mark and understand.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The mother to the child that men call hers</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Is no true life-begetter, but a nurse</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of live seed. ’Tis the sower of the seed</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Alone begetteth. Woman comes at need,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A stranger, to hold safe in trust and love</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That bud of new life⁠—save when God above</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Wills that it die. And would ye proof of this,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>There have been fathers where no mother is.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Whereof a perfect witness standeth nigh,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Athena Pallas, child of the Most High,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A thought-begotten unconceivèd bloom,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>No nursling of the darkness of the womb,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But such a flower of life as goddess ne’er</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Hath born in heaven nor ever more shall bear.</span>
								</p>
								<p>
									<span>Pallas, in all things it is mine to swell</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In power thy people and thy citadel;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And therefore to thine Altar did I send</span>
									<br/>
									<span>This suppliant, that hereafter to the end</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of mortal time he may be true to thee,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And plant his spear by thine unfalteringly,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And on through generations yet unborn</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Argos observe the pact her King hath sworn.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Athena</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Now shall I charge upon their faith these men</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To cast true stones, or would ye speak again?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Leader</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Shot is our every arrow: I but stay</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To learn how ends the issue of the day.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Athena</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>How shall I cast a judgement in this cause</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Unblamed of you, and of the eternal laws?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Apollo</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Ye have heard what ye have heard. Strangers, revere</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Your oaths, and cast your judgement without fear.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Athena</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Hear now mine ordinance, ye who have striven</span>
									<br/>
									<span>This day to give, what none before hath given,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>True judgement o’er spilt blood. O Attic Folk,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Henceforth for ever, under Aigeus’ yoke,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>This Council and this Judgement Seat by me</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Are stablisht. On this mountain shall it be,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Here in the Amazons’ most virgin hold,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Who came in wrath for Theseus’ wrongs of old</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Embattled, and this fortress against ours,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Hill against hill, towers against soaring towers,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Built, and to Ares on the rock with flame</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Gave sacrifice: whence comes its awful name,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The Rock, the Mount, of Ares. All things here</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Being holy, Reverence and her sister, Fear,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In darkness as in daylight shall restrain</span>
									<br/>
									<span>From all unrighteousness the sons of men,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>While Athens’ self corrupt not her own law.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With mire and evil influx ye can flaw</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Fair water till no lips may drink thereof.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I charge you, citizens, enfold and love</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That spirit that nor anarch is nor thrall;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And casting away Fear, yet cast not all;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For who that hath no fear is safe from sin?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That Fear which is both Ruth and Law within</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Be yours, and round your city and your land</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Shall be upraised a rampart, yea, a hand</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of strong deliverance, which no sons of men,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>From the Isle of Pelops to the Scythian fen,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Possess nor know, this Council of the Right,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Untouched of lucre, terrible to smite,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And swift and merciful, a guard to keep</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Vigil above my people while they sleep.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Which here I establish. Let these words advise</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My city evermore.⁠—I charge you, rise</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And lift your stones of doom and judge, alway</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Your oath remembering. I have said my say. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">The <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Judges</b> rise and go one by one past the two urns, casting their stones as they pass.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Leader</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Behold, an awful presence moveth yet</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Within your land, which mock not nor forget!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Apollo</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>The will of Zeus, by my lips ministered,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I charge you make not fruitless nor unfeared!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Leader</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>And what wouldst thou with blood, having therein</span>
									<br/>
									<span>No place? Henceforth thine altars are unclean!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Apollo</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Did Zeus, then, sin, who bowed his head to spare</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Blood-red Ixîon for his burning prayer?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Leader</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Thou speakest: but my Law, if it be broke,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Shall come again in wrath to haunt this folk.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Apollo</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Thou hast no honour more ’mid things divine,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Or old or new: the victory shall be mine.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Leader</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>So in Admêtus’ House thou didst betray</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The Fates, to make man deathless past his day.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Apollo</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Shall not a god regard his worshipper</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Then chiefliest, when in peril and in prayer?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Leader</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>The ancient boundaries thou didst desecrate,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thou mad’st a drunkard of Eternal Fate!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Apollo</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>True Justice thou canst know not. Thou shalt spue</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thy venom forth, and none give heed thereto.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Leader</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Women are we, and old; and thou dost ride</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Above us, trampling, in thy youth and pride.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Howbeit, I wait to know the end, being still</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In doubt to work this City good or ill.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Athena</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>One judgement still remains. I, at the last,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To set Orestes free this stone will cast:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For, lo, no mother bare me: I approve</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In all⁠—save only that I know not love⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The man’s way. Flesh and spirit I am His</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Who gave me life. And in this coil it is</span>
									<br/>
									<span>No dire deed that a woman, who had slain</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Her mate and house-lord, should be quelled again.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Wherefore I judge that here, if equal be</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The votes ye cast, Orestes shall go free.</span>
								</p>
								<p>
									<span>Ye judges, haste: on you this office turns:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And cast the gathered sea-stones from the urns.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orestes</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Apollo, Lord, what shall the issue be?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Leader</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>O Night, O dark-eyed Mother, dost thou see?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orestes</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Is it the noose of death, or life and light?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Leader</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>My law down-trodden or enthroned in right?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Apollo</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Divide the fallen sea-stones as is due,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Strangers, and in the count see all be true.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>An absent voice hath made life ruinous,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And one cast pebble built a fallen house. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">The scrutineers bring their results to <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Athena</b>.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Athena</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>This prisoner, since the stones for ill and good</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Are equal, hath escaped the doom of blood.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orestes</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>O Pallas, O deliverer of my race,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thou hast led back the wanderer to his place,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The homeless to his home; and men shall say</span>
									<br/>
									<span>“Once more he is an Argive, and this day</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Dwells in his father’s riches, by the word</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of Pallas, Loxias, and Zeus the Third,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Who saveth all and all accomplisheth.”</span>
									<br/>
									<span>’Twas He of old who saw my father’s death,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And pitied; He who saw pursuing me</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My mother’s ministers, and set me free.</span>
								</p>
								<p>
									<span>Pallas, to this thy people and thy clime</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Through all the long years of ensuing Time</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I swear, ere I depart to mine own land,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>This oath. No captain of an Argive band</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Shall ever against Athens raise his spear.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Yea, and if any break this law, I swear</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Myself out of the grave bewilderment</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Shall set before their host, and discontent,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Disheartened roads and rivers evil-starred,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Till back they turn, bowed down by toils too hard</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For bearing. But if still with vow unbroke,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Through storm or shine, for Pallas and her folk</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Their lance is lifted, then to Argos too</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My love shall be the greater, and hold true.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And fare thee well, O Pallas; fare you well,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>All that within her ancient rampart dwell;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Iron may your grasp against all evil be,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And strong to save, and big with victory! <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Orestes</b>.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Furies</td>
							<td>
								<blockquote epub:type="z3998:song">
									<p>
										<span class="i2">Woe on you, woe, ye younger gods!</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i4">Ye have trampled the great Laws of old</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i1">Beneath your chariots! Ye have broke the rods</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i3">Of justice, yea and torn them from my hold!</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i1">Mine office gone, unhappy and angered sore,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i1">I rage alone. What have I any more</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">To do? Or be? Shall not mine injury turn</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i3">And crush this people? Shall not poison rain</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i3">Upon them, even the poison of this pain</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i5">Wherewith my heart doth burn?</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i1">And up therefrom there shall a lichen creep,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i5">A leafless, childless, blight,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>A stain in the earth man-slaying.⁠ ⁠… O just</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">Throne of Right!</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i5">Have ye not suffered deep,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i1">Deep, ye unhappy children of old Night,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i5">Born to be scorned and weep!</span>
									</p>
								</blockquote>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Athena</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I pray you, nay! Make not this bitter moan;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Ye are not conquered. Equal, stone for stone,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The judgement fell, in honesty of thought,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Not scorn of thee. From Zeus on high was brought</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A shining witness; and the god, who gave</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The word to slay, himself was here to save,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Lest this man for obedience to his will</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Should perish.⁠ ⁠… And for this ye fain would spill</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Your poison? Ah, take thought! Nor on our heads</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Rain the strange dew a spirit’s anger sheds,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Seed-ravening blight and mildews merciless,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Till all the land lie waste in fruitlessness.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Spare us, and, lo, I promise: here shall be</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A home your own, a caverned mystery,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Where alway ye shall sit, enthroned in pride</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And shining, by my people glorified.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Furies</td>
							<td>
								<blockquote epub:type="z3998:song">
									<p>
										<span class="i2">Woe on you, woe, ye younger gods!</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i4">Ye have trampled the great Laws of old</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i1">Beneath your chariots! Ye have broke the rods</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i3">Of justice, yea and torn them from my hold!</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i1">Mine office gone, unhappy and angered sore,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i1">I rage alone. What have I any more</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">To do? Or be? Shall not mine injury turn</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i3">And crush this people? Shall not poison rain</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i3">Upon them, even the poison of this pain</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i5">Wherewith my heart doth burn?</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i1">And up therefrom there shall a lichen creep,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i5">A leafless, childless, blight,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>A stain in the earth man-slaying.⁠ ⁠… O just</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">Throne of Right!</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i5">Have ye not suffered deep,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i1">Deep, ye unhappy children of old Night,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i5">Born to be scorned and weep!</span>
									</p>
								</blockquote>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Athena</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Ah, rage not. No dishonour comes you nigh;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Nor, being immortal, blast for these who die</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Their little life and land. I, even as you,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Obey the supreme Father, yea, I too.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>What boots it to say more? To me alone</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The keys of that great treasure-house are known</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Where sleep the lightnings.⁠—But He needs them not!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Accept my word, and cast not here the hot</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Fruits of a passion that turns all to ill:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Bid the dark tempest’s bitter surge be still,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thou great in glory, partner of my home!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>From many miles of land to thee shall come</span>
									<br/>
									<span>First-fruits for maidens wed, for children born;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Then shall ye bless this peace that we have sworn.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Furies</td>
							<td>
								<blockquote epub:type="z3998:song">
									<p>
										<span class="i3">That this should fall on me,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i5">Me of the ancient way,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i3">The faithful of heart! To be</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i3">Unclean, abominable,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i3">In the darkness where I dwell,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i5">And mine honour shorn away!</span>
										<br/>
										<span>My breath is as a fire flung far and wide,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>And a strange anguish stabbeth at my side.</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Hear thou my wrath, O Mother, Night, mine own,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Hear what these young false-handed gods have wrought!</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Mine immemorial honour is overthrown,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i5">And I am naught!</span>
									</p>
								</blockquote>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Athena</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Thine heaviness myself will help thee bear.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Older thou art than I, and surely ware</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of wisdom that I wot not: yet also</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To me Zeus giveth both to think and know.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And if ye leave us for the stranger’s shore,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>This know I, that your heart shall still be sore</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For Athens. Time’s great river in its flow</span>
									<br/>
									<span>From darkness shall but make her glory grow.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And here in honour at Erechtheus’ side</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Enthronèd, thou shalt garner gifts of pride</span>
									<br/>
									<span>From men and women worshippers, in fair</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Procession moving, richer and more rare</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Than eye of man hath seen in other lands.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Such offering now awaits thee at my hands:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Blessing and blest, ’mid glories gladly given,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To share this land, the best beloved of Heaven.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Furies</td>
							<td>
								<blockquote epub:type="z3998:song">
									<p>
										<span class="i3">That this should fall on me,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i5">Me of the ancient way,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i3">The faithful of heart! To be</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i3">Unclean, abominable,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i3">In the darkness where I dwell,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i5">And mine honour shorn away!</span>
										<br/>
										<span>My breath is as a fire flung far and wide,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>And a strange anguish stabbeth at my side.</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Hear thou my wrath, O Mother, Night, mine own,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Hear what these young false-handed gods have wrought!</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Mine immemorial honour is overthrown,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i5">And I am naught!</span>
									</p>
								</blockquote>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Athena</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I will not cease thine anger to assuage</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With good words. None shall say that, in thine age,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>By younger gods and city-building men</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thou and thy law were mocked, cast out again</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To walk the wilderness, exiles from hence.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>If thou canst hold that spirit in reverence</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Which hears Persuasion and which thinks again,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Whose understanding and whose peace doth reign</span>
									<br/>
									<span>By God’s appointment in my word and thought,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Here thou wilt stay. Or, if that please thee not,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thou shalt not justly lay upon this land</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Or wrath, or vengeance, or afflicting hand.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Stay, if ye will. Let this soil be your own</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With Right made perfect and an ageless throne.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Leader</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Great Pallas, what abode shall be my lot?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Athena</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>A throne unwashed by tears; reject it not.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Leader</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Say I consent; what shall mine office be?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Athena</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>No house shall prosper save by aid of thee.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Leader</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Such greatness mine! Wilt thou thereof have care?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Athena</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Yea; and through life uphold thy worshipper.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Leader</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>For dateless time thou giv’st me warranty?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Athena</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>How should I speak the thing that shall not be?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Leader</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Thou wilt soften me.⁠ ⁠… Methinks mine anger bends.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Athena</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Stay, and that softened mood will find thee friends.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Leader</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>What spell upon the land wouldst have me lay?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Athena</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>All that brings Victory and not Dismay.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>From earth and dewy sea⁠—be this thy prayer⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>From moving winds and the still dome of air</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Let breaths of gladness and sweet sunlight come;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The fruit of flocks and fields round every home</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Abundant flow and, year by year, be true.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The seeds of human life make fruitful, too,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Save in the ungodly: them thy Rule of Right</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Shall uproot, as of old. For I delight,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Like one that tends his garden, to uprear</span>
									<br/>
									<span>These plants of righteousness, untouched by fear</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of evil. Cast not on this soil of mine</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thy whet-stones of the blood, like poisonous wine</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In young men’s hearts, till rage and death be stirred.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Oh, take not from the fierce mate-murdering bird</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The heart to give my people, the blind war</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Within, that burneth most where brethren are.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>War with the stranger, yes; no stint thereof;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Terror is there, and glory, and great love;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But not the mad bird-rage that slays at home.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Such let thine office be. And if there come</span>
									<br/>
									<span>True-hearted war, I will not fail to uphold</span>
									<br/>
									<span>This land victorious where great deeds are told. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">At a sign from the <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Leader</b>, the <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Furies</b> take formation for a Song of Blessing.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Furies</td>
							<td>
								<blockquote epub:type="z3998:song">
									<p>
										<span class="i2">A home with Pallas shall be mine.</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i3">I will not give this City nay,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">The Fort of Heaven, which Zeus divine</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i3">And faithful Ares hold in sway,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">A shining loveliness to enfold</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">The altars of the gods of old.</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">For whom⁠—so do I weave my prayer</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i3">And move with words of presage good⁠—</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">All fortunes whereby life is fair,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i3">Like springing fountains, up shall flood,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">From Earth’s deep-bosomed caverns won</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">By wooing of the enthronèd Sun.</span>
									</p>
								</blockquote>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Athena</td>
							<td>
								<blockquote epub:type="z3998:song">
									<p>
										<span class="i2">I love my City; and with plan</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i3">Aforethought here have welcomed these,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i3">The Awarders great and hard to appease,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">Whose realm is all the estate of man.</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">Justice is theirs: though many an one</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i3">May meet their wrath in innocence,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i3">Not knowing why the wound nor whence,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">That striketh. Some great evil done</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">Aforetime, with no payment just,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i3">Casts him to These. Strange wrath and hate</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i3">Are round him, and he cries: but Fate,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">Unanswering, grindeth him to dust.</span>
									</p>
								</blockquote>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Furies</td>
							<td>
								<blockquote epub:type="z3998:song">
									<p>
										<span class="i2">No storm-wind⁠—so I speak my prize⁠—</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i3">Shall breathe the blight that poisoneth trees;</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">No burning things that blind the eyes</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i3">Of plants, shall pass her boundaries:</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">The groaning pest shall come not nigh,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">Nor fruit upon the branches die.</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">The flocks shall browse in happy cheer,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i3">And Pan, the Shepherd, guard them true,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">With twofold increase, as the year</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i3">Repays her seeds in season due;</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">And deep-hid treasures of the ground</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">Shall be in God’s due order found.</span>
									</p>
								</blockquote>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Athena</td>
							<td>
								<blockquote epub:type="z3998:song">
									<p>
										<span class="i2">Ye Guardians, hear the word she hath said,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i3">And shall fulfill! Most potent hands</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i3">Hath great Erînys, in the lands</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">Where dwell the deathless and the dead.</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">And all this world of men declares</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i3">Her visible act on right and wrong;</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i3">How one man’s life she makes a song,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">Another’s a long mist of tears.</span>
									</p>
								</blockquote>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Furies</td>
							<td>
								<blockquote epub:type="z3998:song">
									<p>
										<span class="i3">Let manhood’s glory by no doom</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i4">Of death untimely be defiled;</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i3">Let life to maidens in their bloom</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i4">Bring each a lover and a child.</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i3">O whatsoever Gods have power,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i3">And Fates eternal, grant this dower!</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i3">Ye Fates, our Mother’s Sisterhood,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i4">Assigners true to all that be,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i3">To every house its ill and good,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i4">To every hour its potency;</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i3">Righteous participants through all,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i3">Of Gods the most majestical.</span>
									</p>
								</blockquote>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Athena</td>
							<td>
								<blockquote epub:type="z3998:song">
									<p>
										<span class="i2">With joy I hear their prescient song</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i3">Touching my land; and much in pride</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i3">I praise Persuasion gentle-eyed,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">Who guarded well my lips and tongue,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">When these were wrathful and denied;</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i3">But Zeus, whose Word is in the Mart,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i3">Prevailed; and of our strife no part,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">Save strife in blessing, shall abide.</span>
									</p>
								</blockquote>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Furies</td>
							<td>
								<blockquote epub:type="z3998:song">
									<p>
										<span class="i2">Let her who hungereth still for wrong,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i3">Faction, in Athens ne’er again</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">Lift on the air her ravening song;</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i3">Let not the dust of Pallas’ Plain</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">Drink the dark blood of any son</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">By fury of revenge fordone.</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">Rage not to smite the smiter, lest</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i3">By rage the City’s heart be torn:</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">Bless him that blesseth: in each breast</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i3">So shall a single love be born,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">And ’gainst Her foes a single hate.</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">This also maketh firm a state.</span>
									</p>
								</blockquote>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Athena</td>
							<td>
								<blockquote epub:type="z3998:song">
									<p>
										<span class="i2">Wise are they and have found the way</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i3">Of peace. And in each awful face</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i3">I see for you, my People, grace:</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">If ye are gentle, even as they,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">And do them worship, this shall be</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i3">Your work: to guide through ill, through good,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i3">Both land and town in that pure mood</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">Of truth that shuns iniquity. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">The <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Judges</b> and the concourse of <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Athenians</b> have now formed into procession, to escort the <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Furies</b> to their Cavern.</i></span>
									</p>
								</blockquote>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus of Athenians</td>
							<td>
								<blockquote epub:type="z3998:song">
									<p>
										<span class="i2">Rejoice, rejoice! And as ye go your ways</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">In rich apportionment of blissful days,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i6">Farewell, farewell!</span>
									</p>
								</blockquote>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Furies</td>
							<td>
								<blockquote epub:type="z3998:song">
									<p>
										<span class="i2">Ye folk within the wall, approved</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i3">To neighbour Jove’s eternal eyes,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">Ye lovers of the Well-beloved,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i3">The Virgin Spirit, timely wise,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">The wings of Pallas fold above you,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">Therefore shall Zeus the Father love you.</span>
									</p>
								</blockquote>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Athena</td>
							<td>
								<blockquote epub:type="z3998:song">
									<p>
										<span class="i2">Fare ye well also. I must go</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i3">Before you, guiding, to make bright</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i3">Your secret chambers with the light,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">The holy light, they dared not know.</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">Come, and when deep beneath the veil</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i3">Of earth ye pass, ’mid offering high,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i3">Hold down the evil that shall die,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">Send up the good that shall prevail.</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">Ye sons of Cranaos, guide them, till</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i3">These Wanderers rest within your doors:</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i3">With them one City now is yours;</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">Be one in working and in will!</span>
									</p>
								</blockquote>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus of Athenians</td>
							<td>
								<blockquote epub:type="z3998:song">
									<p>
										<span class="i2">Rejoice, rejoice! I raise my voice again,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">To speak that bliss that overtowereth pain.</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i6">Farewell, farewell!</span>
									</p>
								</blockquote>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Furies</td>
							<td>
								<blockquote epub:type="z3998:song">
									<p>
										<span class="i2">All things within the Wall that dwell,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i3">All gods and men, that are or were;</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">All life from Pallas’ citadel</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i3">Which draws its being, I am here:</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">These Dwellers in your gates adore,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">And fear the tides of Life no more!</span>
									</p>
								</blockquote>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Athena</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>The prayers they have uttered o’er my land I praise;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And speed them on, ’mid many a torch’s blaze,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To that most deep and subterranean end Of wandering.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Let these ministers, who tend</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Mine image, follow; righteous warders they.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Let all the fulness of the land this day,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Children, and wives and women bent with years,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Come forth: do worship to these Wanderers</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Accepted in their robes of crimson dye.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Let leap the flash of fire. This great</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Ally Shall be revealed and proven in the fate</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of Athens, if her men be true and great.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus of Athenians</td>
							<td>
								<blockquote epub:type="z3998:song">
									<p>
										<span>Gather ye home; are ye great, do ye crave adoration,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i1">O childless Children of Night in the pride of your going?</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">(Give good words, O Folk of the Fold!)</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Aeonian caverns of glory are yours, and oblation</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i1">Of worship, and sacrifice high, and praise overflowing.</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i2">(Give good words, O young men and old!)</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Come with the Law that can pardon, the Judgement that knoweth,</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i1">O Semnai, Semnai, watchers o’er people and land;</span>
										<br/>
										<span>And joy be a-stream in your ways, as the fire that bloweth</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i3">A-stream from beacon and brand. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">A cry of joy rises above the singing.</i></span>
									</p>
									<p>
										<span>Outpour ye the Chalice of Peace where the torches are blending:</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i1">In Pallas the place it is found and the task it is done.</span>
										<br/>
										<span>The Law that is Fate and the Father the All-Comprehending</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i4">Are here met together as one. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Again a cry of joy as the Procession passes out of sight.</i></span>
									</p>
								</blockquote>
							</td>
						</tr>
					</tbody>
				</table>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
